(_The_ THREE ARCHANGELS _come forward_.)

Since Thou, O Lord, deign’st to approach again
And ask us how we do, in manner kindest,
And heretofore to meet myself wert fain,
Among Thy menials, now, my face Thou findest.
Pardon, this troop I cannot follow after
With lofty speech, though by them scorned and spurned:
My pathos certainly would move Thy laughter,
If Thou hadst not all merriment unlearned.
Of suns and worlds I’ve nothing to be quoted;
How men torment themselves, is all I’ve noted.
The little god o’ the world sticks to the same old way,
And is as whimsical as on Creation’s day.
Life somewhat better might content him,
But for the gleam of heavenly light which Thou hast lent him:
He calls it Reason—thence his power’s increased,
To be far beastlier than any beast.
Saving Thy Gracious Presence, he to me
A long-legged grasshopper appears to be,
That springing flies, and flying springs,
And in the grass the same old ditty sings.
Would he still lay among the grass he grows in!
Each bit of dung he seeks, to stick his nose in.


THE LORD

Hast thou, then, nothing more to mention?
Com’st ever, thus, with ill intention?
Find’st nothing right on earth, eternally?

No, Lord! I find things, there, still bad as they can be.
Man’s misery even to pity moves my nature;
I’ve scarce the heart to plague the wretched creature.


THE LORD

Know’st Faust?

The Doctor Faust?


THE LORD

My servant, he!

Forsooth! He serves you after strange devices:
No earthly meat or drink the fool suffices:
His spirit’s ferment far aspireth;
Half conscious of his frenzied, crazed unrest,
The fairest stars from Heaven he requireth,
From Earth the highest raptures and the best,
And all the Near and Far that he desireth
Fails to subdue the tumult of his breast.


THE LORD

Though still confused his service unto Me,
I soon shall lead him to a clearer morning.
Sees not the gardener, even while buds his tree,
Both flower and fruit the future years adorning?

What will you bet? There’s still a chance to gain him,
If unto me full leave you give,
Gently upon _my_ road to train him!


THE LORD

As long as he on earth shall live,
So long I make no prohibition.
While Man’s desires and aspirations stir,
He cannot choose but err.

My thanks! I find the dead no acquisition,
And never cared to have them in my keeping.
I much prefer the cheeks where ruddy blood is leaping,
And when a corpse approaches, close my house:
It goes with me, as with the cat the mouse.


THE LORD

Enough! What thou hast asked is granted.
Turn off this spirit from his fountain-head;
To trap him, let thy snares be planted,
And him, with thee, be downward led;
Then stand abashed, when thou art forced to say:
A good man, through obscurest aspiration,
Has still an instinct of the one true way.

Agreed! But ’tis a short probation.
About my bet I feel no trepidation.
If I fulfill my expectation,
You’ll let me triumph with a swelling breast:
Dust shall he eat, and with a zest,
As did a certain snake, my near relation.


THE LORD

Therein thou’rt free, according to thy merits;
The like of thee have never moved My hate.
Of all the bold, denying Spirits,
The waggish knave least trouble doth create.
Man’s active nature, flagging, seeks too soon the level;
Unqualified repose he learns to crave;
Whence, willingly, the comrade him I gave,
Who works, excites, and must create, as Devil.
But ye, God’s sons in love and duty,
Enjoy the rich, the ever-living Beauty!
Creative Power, that works eternal schemes,
Clasp you in bonds of love, relaxing never,
And what in wavering apparition gleams
Fix in its place with thoughts that stand forever!


(_Heaven closes: the_ ARCHANGELS _separate_.)


MEPHISTOPHELES (_solus_)

I like, at times, to hear The Ancient’s word,
And have a care to be most civil:
It’s really kind of such a noble Lord
So humanly to gossip with the Devil!
[Illustration]
[Illustration]




FIRST PART OF THE TRAGEDY

(_while the vapor is dissipating, steps forth from behind the
stove, in the costume of a Travelling Scholar_.)
Why such a noise? What are my lord’s commands?

The learned gentleman I bow before:
You’ve made me roundly sweat, that’s certain!

A question small, it seems,
For one whose mind the Word so much despises;
Who, scorning all external gleams,
The depths of being only prizes.

Part of that Power, not understood,
Which always wills the Bad, and always works the Good.

I am the Spirit that Denies!
And justly so: for all things, from the Void
Called forth, deserve to be destroyed:
’Twere better, then, were naught created.
Thus, all which you as Sin have rated,—
Destruction,—aught with Evil blent,—
That is my proper element.

The modest truth I speak to thee.
If Man, that microcosmic fool, can see
Himself a whole so frequently,
Part of the Part am I, once All, in primal Night,—
Part of the Darkness which brought forth the Light,
The haughty Light, which now disputes the space,
And claims of Mother Night her ancient place.
And yet, the struggle fails; since Light, howe’er it weaves,
Still, fettered, unto bodies cleaves:
It flows from bodies, bodies beautifies;
By bodies is its course impeded;
And so, but little time is needed,
I hope, ere, as the bodies die, it dies!

And truly ’tis not much, when all is done.
That which to Naught is in resistance set,—
The Something of this clumsy world,—has yet,
With all that I have undertaken,
Not been by me disturbed or shaken:
From earthquake, tempest, wave, volcano’s brand,
Back into quiet settle sea and land!
And that damned stuff, the bestial, human brood,—
What use, in having that to play with?
How many have I made away with!
And ever circulates a newer, fresher blood.
It makes me furious, such things beholding:
From Water, Earth, and Air unfolding,
A thousand germs break forth and grow,
In dry, and wet, and warm, and chilly;
And had I not the Flame reserved, why, really,
There’s nothing special of my own to show!

Well, we’ll consider: thou canst gather
My views, when next I venture in.
Might I, perhaps, depart at present?

I must confess that forth I may not wander,
My steps by one slight obstacle controlled,—
The wizard’s-foot, that on your threshold made is.

Inspect the thing: the drawing’s not completed.
The outer angle, you may see,
Is open left—the lines don’t fit it.

The poodle naught remarked, as after thee he speeded;
But other aspects now obtain:
The Devil can’t get out again.

For Devils and for spectres this is law:
Where they have entered in, there also they withdraw.
The first is free to us; we’re governed by the second.

All that is promised shall delight thee purely;
No skinflint bargain shalt thou see.
But this is not of swift conclusion;
We’ll talk about the matter soon.
And now, I do entreat this boon—
Leave to withdraw from my intrusion.

Release me, now! I soon shall come again;
Then thou, at will, mayst question and compel me.

An’t please thee, also I’m content to stay,
And serve thee in a social station;
But stipulating, that I may
With arts of mine afford thee recreation.

My friend, thou’lt win, past all pretences,
More in this hour to soothe thy senses,
Than in the year’s monotony.
That which the dainty spirits sing thee,
The lovely pictures they shall bring thee,
Are more than magic’s empty show.
Thy scent will be to bliss invited;
Thy palate then with taste delighted,
Thy nerves of touch ecstatic glow!
All unprepared, the charm I spin:
We’re here together, so begin!

He sleeps! Enough, ye fays! your airy number
Have sung him truly into slumber:
For this performance I your debtor prove.—
Not yet art thou the man, to catch the Fiend and hold him!—
With fairest images of dreams infold him,
Plunge him in seas of sweet untruth!
Yet, for the threshold’s magic which controlled him,
The Devil needs a rat’s quick tooth.
I use no lengthened invocation:
Here rustles one that soon will work my liberation.

The lord of rats and eke of mice,
Of flies and bed-bugs, frogs and lice,
Summons thee hither to the door-sill,
To gnaw it where, with just a morsel
Of oil, he paints the spot for thee:—
There com’st thou, hopping on to me!
To work, at once! The point which made me craven
Is forward, on the ledge, engraven.
Another bite makes free the door:
So, dream thy dreams, O Faust, until we meet once more!

FAUST _(awaking)_

Am I again so foully cheated?
Remains there naught of lofty spirit-sway,
But that a dream the Devil counterfeited,
And that a poodle ran away?

[Illustration]



’Tis I!

Thrice must the words be spoken.

Thus thou pleasest me.
I hope we’ll suit each other well;
For now, thy vapors to dispel,
I come, a squire of high degree,
In scarlet coat, with golden trimming,
A cloak in silken lustre swimming,
A tall cock’s-feather in my hat,
A long, sharp sword for show or quarrel,—
And I advise thee, brief and flat,
To don the self-same gay apparel,
That, from this den released, and free,
Life be at last revealed to thee!

And yet is never Death a wholly welcome guest.

And yet, by some one, in that nightly hour,
A certain liquid was not drunken.

Omniscient am I not; yet much is known to me.

These are the small dependants
Who give me attendance.
Hear them, to deeds and passion
Counsel in shrewd old-fashion!
Into the world of strife,
Out of this lonely life
That of senses and sap has betrayed thee,
They would persuade thee.
This nursing of the pain forego thee,
That, like a vulture, feeds upon thy breast!
The worst society thou find’st will show thee
Thou art a man among the rest.
But ’tis not meant to thrust
Thee into the mob thou hatest!
I am not one of the greatest,
Yet, wilt thou to me entrust
Thy steps through life, I’ll guide thee,—
Will willingly walk beside thee,—
Will serve thee at once and forever
With best endeavor,
And, if thou art satisfied,
Will as servant, slave, with thee abide.

The time is long: thou need’st not now insist.

_Here_, an unwearied slave, I’ll wear thy tether,
And to thine every nod obedient be:
When _There_ again we come together,
Then shalt thou do the same for me.

In this sense, even, canst thou venture.
Come, bind thyself by prompt indenture,
And thou mine arts with joy shalt see:
What no man ever saw, I’ll give to thee.

Such a demand alarms me not:
Such treasures have I, and can show them.
But still the time may reach us, good my friend.
When peace we crave and more luxurious diet.

Done!

Consider well: my memory good is rated.

Then at the Doctors’-banquet I, to-day,
Will as a servant wait behind thee.
But one thing more! Beyond all risk to bind thee,
Give me a line or two, I pray.

Why heat thyself, thus instantly,
With eloquence exaggerated?
Each leaf for such a pact is good;
And to subscribe thy name thou’lt take a drop of blood.

Blood is a juice of rarest quality.

For you no bound, no term is set.
Whether you everywhere be trying,
Or snatch a rapid bliss in flying,
May it agree with you, what you get!
Only fall to, and show no timid balking.

Believe me, who for many a thousand year
The same tough meat have chewed and tested,
That from the cradle to the bier
No man the ancient leaven has digested!
Trust one of us, this Whole supernal
Is made but for a God’s delight!
_He_ dwells in splendor single and eternal,
But _us_ he thrusts in darkness, out of sight,
And _you_ he dowers with Day and Night.

A good reply!
One only fear still needs repeating:
The art is long, the time is fleeting.
Then let thyself be taught, say I!
Go, league thyself with a poet,
Give the rein to his imagination,
Then wear the crown, and show it,
Of the qualities of his creation,—
The courage of the lion’s breed,
The wild stag’s speed,
The Italian’s fiery blood,
The North’s firm fortitude!
Let him find for thee the secret tether
That binds the Noble and Mean together.
And teach thy pulses of youth and pleasure
To love by rule, and hate by measure!
I’d like, myself, such a one to see:
Sir Microcosm his name should be.

Why, on the whole, thou’rt—what thou art.
Set wigs of million curls upon thy head, to raise thee,
Wear shoes an ell in height,—the truth betrays thee,
And thou remainest—what thou art.

Good Sir, you see the facts precisely
As they are seen by each and all.
We must arrange them now, more wisely,
Before the joys of life shall pall.
Why, Zounds! Both hands and feet are, truly—
And head and virile forces—thine:
Yet all that I indulge in newly,
Is’t thence less wholly mine?
If I’ve six stallions in my stall,
Are not their forces also lent me?
I speed along, completest man of all,
As though my legs were four-and-twenty.
Take hold, then! let reflection rest,
And plunge into the world with zest!
I say to thee, a speculative wight
Is like a beast on moorlands lean,
That round and round some fiend misleads to evil plight,
While all about lie pastures fresh and green.

We’ll try a wider sphere.
What place of martyrdom is here!
Is’t life, I ask, is’t even prudence,
To bore thyself and bore the students?
Let Neighbor Paunch to that attend!
Why plague thyself with threshing straw forever?
The best thou learnest, in the end
Thou dar’st not tell the youngsters—never!
I hear one’s footsteps, hither steering.

So long the poor boy waits a hearing,
He must not unconsoled depart.
Thy cap and mantle straightway lend me!
I’ll play the comedy with art.

(_He disguises himself_.)

My wits, be certain, will befriend me.
But fifteen minutes’ time is all I need;
For our fine trip, meanwhile, prepare thyself with speed!

[_Exit_ FAUST.

(_In_ FAUST’S _long mantle_.)

Reason and Knowledge only thou despise,
The highest strength in man that lies!
Let but the Lying Spirit bind thee
With magic works and shows that blind thee,
And I shall have thee fast and sure!—
Fate such a bold, untrammelled spirit gave him,
As forwards, onwards, ever must endure;
Whose over-hasty impulse drave him
Past earthly joys he might secure.
Dragged through the wildest life, will I enslave him,
Through flat and stale indifference;
With struggling, chilling, checking, so deprave him
That, to his hot, insatiate sense,
The dream of drink shall mock, but never lave him:
Refreshment shall his lips in vain implore—
Had he not made himself the Devil’s, naught could save
him,
Still were he lost forevermore!

(_A_ STUDENT _enters_.)

Your courtesy doth flatter me:
You see a man, as others be.
Have you, perchance, elsewhere begun?

Then you have reached the right place now.

All that depends on habitude.
So from its mother’s breasts a child
At first, reluctant, takes its food,
But soon to seek them is beguiled.
Thus, at the breasts of Wisdom clinging,
Thou’lt find each day a greater rapture bringing.

Explain, before you further speak,
The special faculty you seek.

Here is the genuine path for you;
Yet strict attention must be given.

Use well your time! It flies so swiftly from us;
But time through order may be won, I promise.
So, Friend (my views to briefly sum),
First, the _collegium logicum_.
There will your mind be drilled and braced,
As if in Spanish boots ’twere laced,
And thus, to graver paces brought,
’Twill plod along the path of thought,
Instead of shooting here and there,
A will-o’-the-wisp in murky air.
Days will be spent to bid you know,
What once you did at a single blow,
Like eating and drinking, free and strong,—
That one, two, three! thereto belong.
Truly the fabric of mental fleece
Resembles a weaver’s masterpiece,
Where a thousand threads one treadle throws,
Where fly the shuttles hither and thither.
Unseen the threads are knit together.
And an infinite combination grows.
Then, the philosopher steps in
And shows, no otherwise it could have been:
The first was so, the second so,
Therefore the third and fourth are so;
Were not the first and second, then
The third and fourth had never been.
The scholars are everywhere believers,
But never succeed in being weavers.
He who would study organic existence,
First drives out the soul with rigid persistence;
Then the parts in his hand he may hold and class,
But the spiritual link is lost, alas!
_Encheiresin natures_, this Chemistry names,
Nor knows how herself she banters and blames!

Your mind will shortly be set aright,
When you have learned, all things reducing,
To classify them for your using.

And after—first and foremost duty—Of
Metaphysics learn the use and beauty!
See that you most profoundly gain
What does not suit the human brain!
A splendid word to serve, you’ll find
For what goes in—or won’t go in—your mind.
But first, at least this half a year,
To order rigidly adhere;
Five hours a day, you understand,
And when the clock strikes, be on hand!
Prepare beforehand for your part
With paragraphs all got by heart,
So you can better watch, and look
That naught is said but what is in the book:
Yet in thy writing as unwearied be,
As did the Holy Ghost dictate to thee!

Yet choose thyself a faculty!

Nor can I therefore greatly blame you students:
I know what science this has come to be.
All rights and laws are still transmitted
Like an eternal sickness of the race,—
From generation unto generation fitted,
And shifted round from place to place.
Reason becomes a sham, Beneficence a worry:
Thou art a grandchild, therefore woe to thee!
The right born with us, ours in verity,
This to consider, there’s, alas! no hurry.

I should not wish to see you here misguided:
For, as regards this science, let me hint
’Tis very hard to shun the false direction;
There’s so much secret poison lurking in ’t,
So like the medicine, it baffles your detection.
Hear, therefore, one alone, for that is best, in sooth,
And simply take your master’s words for truth.
On _words_ let your attention centre!
Then through the safest gate you’ll enter
The temple-halls of Certainty.

Of course! But only shun too over-sharp a tension,
For just where fails the comprehension,
A word steps promptly in as deputy.
With words ’tis excellent disputing;
Systems to words ’tis easy suiting;
On words ’tis excellent believing;
No word can ever lose a jot from thieving.

My worthy friend, gray are all theories,
And green alone Life’s golden tree.

Most willingly, to what extent I may.

Assuredly.

(_He writes, and returns the book_.)

STUDENT (_reads_)

_Eritis sicut Deus, scientes bonum et malum_.
(_Closes the book with reverence, and withdraws_)

Follow the ancient text, and the snake thou wast ordered to trample!
With all thy likeness to God, thou’lt yet be a sorry example!

(FAUST _enters_.)

As best it pleases thee.
The little world, and then the great, we’ll see.
With what delight, what profit winning,
Shalt thou sponge through the term beginning!

My friend, thou soon shalt lose all such misgiving:
Be thou but self-possessed, thou hast the art of living!

We’ll spread this cloak with proper art,
Then through the air direct our courses.
But only, on so bold a flight,
Be sure to have thy luggage light.
A little burning air, which I shall soon prepare us,
Above the earth will nimbly bear us,
And, if we’re light, we’ll travel swift and clear:
I gratulate thee on thy new career!

[Illustration]



Before all else, I bring thee hither
Where boon companions meet together,
To let thee see how smooth life runs away.
Here, for the folk, each day’s a holiday:
With little wit, and ease to suit them,
They whirl in narrow, circling trails,
Like kittens playing with their tails?
And if no headache persecute them,
So long the host may credit give,
They merrily and careless live.

Is it permitted that we share your leisure?
In place of cheering drink, which one seeks vainly here,
Your company shall give us pleasure.

We passed, without a call, to-day.
At our last interview, before we parted
Much of his cousins did he speak, entreating
That we should give to each his kindly greeting.

(_He bows to_ FROSCH.)

ALTMAYER (_aside_)

You have it now! he understands.

If I am right, we heard the sound
Of well-trained voices, singing chorus;
And truly, song must here rebound
Superbly from the arches o’er us.

O no! my wish is great, my power is only so-so.

If you desire, a number.

We’ve just retraced our way from. Spain,
The lovely land of wine, and song, and slumber.

(_Sings_.)

There was a king once reigning,
Who had a big black flea—

In silk and velvet gleaming
     He now was wholly drest—
     Had a coat with ribbons streaming,
     A cross upon his breast.
     He had the first of stations,
     A minister’s star and name;
     And also all his relations
     Great lords at court became.

     And the lords and ladies of honor
     Were plagued, awake and in bed;
     The queen she got them upon her,
     The maids were bitten and bled.
     And they did not dare to brush them,
     Or scratch them, day or night:
     We crack them and we crush them,
     At once, whene’er they bite.

     CHORUS (_shouting_)

     We crack them and we crush them,
     At once, whene’er they bite!

I fain would drink with you, my glass to Freedom clinking,
If ’twere a better wine that here I see you drinking.

Did I not fear the landlord might complain,
I’d treat these worthy guests, with pleasure,
To some from out our cellar’s treasure.

Bring me a gimlet here!

The choice is free: make up your minds.

ALTMAYER (_to_ FROSCH)

Aha! you lick your chops, from sheer anticipation.

(_boring a hole in the edge of the table, at the place where_
FROSCH _sits_)

Get me a little wax, to make the stoppers, quick!

(_bores: in the meantime one has made the wax stoppers, and
plugged the holes with them_.)

O no! with gentlemen of such pretence,
That were to venture far, indeed.
Speak out, and make your choice with speed!
With what a vintage can I serve you?

But have a care that you nothing spill!

(_They drink repeatedly_.)

ALL (_sing_)

     As ’twere five hundred hogs, we feel
     So cannibalic jolly!

See, now, the race is happy—it is free!

Take notice, first! their bestiality
Will make a brilliant demonstration.

Be still, old wine-tub.



Once more, my friend, thou talkest sensibly.
There is, to make thee young, a simpler mode and apter;
But in another book ’tis writ for thee,
And is a most eccentric chapter.

Good! the method is revealed
Without or gold or magic or physician.
Betake thyself to yonder field,
There hoe and dig, as thy condition;
Restrain thyself, thy sense and will
Within a narrow sphere to flourish;
With unmixed food thy body nourish;
Live with the ox as ox, and think it not a theft
That thou manur’st the acre which thou reapest;—
That, trust me, is the best mode left,
Whereby for eighty years thy youth thou keepest!

Then to thine aid the witch must call.

That were a charming sport, I own:
I’d build a thousand bridges meanwhile, I’ve a notion.
Not Art and Science serve, alone;
Patience must in the work be shown.
Long is the calm brain active in creation;
Time, only, strengthens the fine fermentation.
And all, belonging thereunto,
Is rare and strange, howe’er you take it:
The Devil taught the thing, ’tis true,
And yet the Devil cannot make it.
(_Perceiving the Animals_)
See, what a delicate race they be!
That is the maid! the man is he!
(_To the Animals_)
It seems the mistress has gone away?

THE ANIMALS

Carousing, to-day!
Off and about,
By the chimney out!

What time takes she for dissipating?

THE ANIMALS

While we to warm our paws are waiting.

MEPHISTOPHELES (_to_ FAUST)

How findest thou the tender creatures?

Why, just such talk as this, for me,
Is that which has the most attractive features!

(_To the Animals_)

But tell me now, ye cursed puppets,
Why do ye stir the porridge so?

THE ANIMALS

We’re cooking watery soup for beggars.

Then a great public you can show.

THE HE-APE

(_comes up and fawns on_ MEPHISTOPHELES)

     O cast thou the dice!
     Make me rich in a trice,
     Let me win in good season!
     Things are badly controlled,
     And had I but gold,
     So had I my reason.

How would the ape be sure his luck enhances.
Could he but try the lottery’s chances!

(_In the meantime the young apes have been playing with a
large ball, which they now roll forward_.)

THE HE-APE

     The world’s the ball:
     Doth rise and fall,
     And roll incessant:
     Like glass doth ring,
     A hollow thing,—
     How soon will’t spring,
     And drop, quiescent?
     Here bright it gleams,
     Here brighter seems:
     I live at present!
     Dear son, I say,
     Keep thou away!
     Thy doom is spoken!
     ’Tis made of clay,
     And will be broken.

What means the sieve?

THE HE-APE (_taking it down_)

     Wert thou the thief,
     I’d know him and shame him.

(_He runs to the_ SHE-APE, _and lets her look through it_.)

     Look through the sieve!
     Know’st thou the thief,
     And darest not name him?

MEPHISTOPHELES (_approaching the fire)_

And what’s this pot?

HE-APE AND SHE-APE

     The fool knows it not!
     He knows not the pot,
     He knows not the kettle!

Impertinent beast!

THE HE-APE

Take the brush here, at least,
And sit down on the settle!

(_He invites_ MEPHISTOPHELES _to sit down_.)

Why, surely, if a God first plagues Himself six days,
Then, self-contented, _Bravo_! says,
Must something clever be created.
This time, thine eyes be satiate!
I’ll yet detect thy sweetheart and ensnare her,
And blest is he, who has the lucky fate,
Some day, as bridegroom, home to bear her.

(FAUST _gazes continually in the mirror_. MEPHISTOPHELES,
_stretching himself out on the settle, and playing with the
brush, continues to speak_.)

So sit I, like the King upon his throne:
I hold the sceptre, here,—and lack the crown alone.

THE ANIMALS

(_who up to this time have been making all kinds of fantastic
movements together bring a crown to_ MEPHISTOPHELES
_with great noise_.)

     O be thou so good
     With sweat and with blood
     The crown to belime!

(_They handle the crown awkwardly and break it into two
pieces, with which they spring around_.)

     ’Tis done, let it be!
     We speak and we see,
     We hear and we rhyme!

FAUST (_before the mirror_)

Woe’s me! I fear to lose my wits.

MEPHISTOPHELES (_pointing to the Animals_)

My own head, now, is really nigh to sinking.

THE ANIMALS

     If lucky our hits,
     And everything fits,
     ’Tis thoughts, and we’re thinking!

FAUST (_as above_)

My bosom burns with that sweet vision;
Let us, with speed, away from here!

MEPHISTOPHELES (_in the same attitude_)

One must, at least, make this admission—
They’re poets, genuine and sincere.

(_The caldron, which the_ SHE-APE _has up to this time neglected
to watch, begins to boil over: there ensues a great flame_,
_which blazes out the chimney. The_ WITCH _comes careering
down through the flame, with terrible cries_.)

THE WITCH

     Ow! ow! ow! ow!
     The damnéd beast—the curséd sow!
     To leave the kettle, and singe the Frau!
     Accurséd fere!

(_Perceiving_ FAUST _and_ MEPHISTOPHELES.)

     What is that here?
     Who are you here?
     What want you thus?
     Who sneaks to us?
     The fire-pain
     Burn bone and brain!

(_She plunges the skimming-ladle into the caldron, and scatters
flames towards_ FAUST, MEPHISTOPHELES, _and the Animals.
The Animals whimper_.)

(_reversing the brush, which he has been holding in his hand,
and striding among the jars and glasses_)

     In two! in two!
     There lies the brew!
     There lies the glass!
     The joke will pass,
     As time, foul ass!
     To the singing of thy crew.

(_As the_ WITCH _starts back, full of wrath and horror_)

Ha! know’st thou me? Abomination, thou!
Know’st thou, at last, thy Lord and Master?
What hinders me from smiting now
Thee and thy monkey-sprites with fell disaster?
Hast for the scarlet coat no reverence?
Dost recognize no more the tall cock’s-feather?
Have I concealed this countenance?—
Must tell my name, old face of leather?

THE WITCH

O pardon, Sir, the rough salute!
Yet I perceive no cloven foot;
And both your ravens, where are _they_ now?

This time, I’ll let thee ’scape the debt;
For since we two together met,
’Tis verily full many a day now.
Culture, which smooth the whole world licks,
Also unto the Devil sticks.
The days of that old Northern phantom now are over:
Where canst thou horns and tail and claws discover?
And, as regards the foot, which I can’t spare, in truth,
’Twould only make the people shun me;
Therefore I’ve worn, like many a spindly youth,
False calves these many years upon me.

THE WITCH (_dancing_)

Reason and sense forsake my brain,
Since I behold Squire Satan here again!

Woman, from such a name refrain!

THE WITCH

Why so? What has it done to thee?

It’s long been written in the Book of Fable;
Yet, therefore, no whit better men we see:
The Evil One has left, the evil ones are stable.
Sir Baron call me thou, then is the matter good;
A cavalier am I, like others in my bearing.
Thou hast no doubt about my noble blood:
See, here’s the coat-of-arms that I am wearing!

(_He makes an indecent gesture_.)

THE WITCH (_laughs immoderately_)

Ha! ha! That’s just your way, I know:
A rogue you are, and you were always so.

MEPHISTOPHELES (_to_ FAUST)

My friend, take proper heed, I pray!
To manage witches, this is just the way.

THE WITCH

Wherein, Sirs, can I be of use?

Give us a goblet of the well-known juice!
But, I must beg you, of the oldest brewage;
The years a double strength produce.

THE WITCH

With all my heart! Now, here’s a bottle,
Wherefrom, sometimes, I wet my throttle,
Which, also, not the slightest, stinks;
And willingly a glass I’ll fill him.

(_Whispering_)

Yet, if this man without due preparation drinks,
As well thou know’st, within an hour ’twill kill him.

He is a friend of mine, with whom it will agree,
And he deserves thy kitchen’s best potation:
Come, draw thy circle, speak thine adjuration,
And fill thy goblet full and free!

THE WITCH

(_with fantastic gestures draws a circle and places mysterious
articles therein; meanwhile the glasses begin to ring, the
caldron to sound, and make a musical accompaniment.
Finally she brings a great book, and stations in the circle
the Apes, who are obliged to serve as reading-desk, and to
hold the torches. She then beckons_ FAUST _to approach_.)

FAUST (_to_ MEPHISTOPHELES)

Now, what shall come of this? the creatures antic,
The crazy stuff, the gestures frantic,—
All the repulsive cheats I view,—
Are known to me, and hated, too.

O, nonsense! That’s a thing for laughter;
Don’t be so terribly severe!
She juggles you as doctor now, that, after,
The beverage may work the proper cheer.

(_He persuades_ FAUST _to step into the circle_.)

THE WITCH

(_begins to declaim, with much emphasis, from the book_)

     See, thus it’s done!
     Make ten of one,
     And two let be,
     Make even three,
     And rich thou ’It be.
     Cast o’er the four!
     From five and six
     (The witch’s tricks)
     Make seven and eight,
     ’Tis finished straight!
     And nine is one,
     And ten is none.
     This is the witch’s once-one’s-one!

Thou’lt hear much more before we leave her.
’Tis all the same: the book I can repeat,
Such time I’ve squandered o’er the history:
A contradiction thus complete
Is always for the wise, no less than fools, a mystery.
The art is old and new, for verily
All ages have been taught the matter,—
By Three and One, and One and Three,
Error instead of Truth to scatter.
They prate and teach, and no one interferes;
All from the fellowship of fools are shrinking.
Man usually believes, if only words he hears,
That also with them goes material for thinking!

THE WITCH (_continues_)

     The lofty skill
     Of Science, still
     From all men deeply hidden!
     Who takes no thought,
     To him ’tis brought,
     ’Tis given unsought, unbidden!

O Sibyl excellent, enough of adjuration!
But hither bring us thy potation,
And quickly fill the beaker to the brim!
This drink will bring my friend no injuries:
He is a man of manifold degrees,
And many draughts are known to him.

(_The_ WITCH, _with many ceremonies, pours the drink into a
cup; as_ FAUST _sets it to his lips, a light flame arises_.)

Down with it quickly! Drain it off!
’Twill warm thy heart with new desire:
Art with the Devil hand and glove,
And wilt thou be afraid of fire?

(_The_ WITCH _breaks the circle_: FAUST _steps forth_.)

And now, away! Thou dar’st not rest.

THE WITCH

And much good may the liquor do thee!

MEPHISTOPHELES (_to the_ WITCH)

Thy wish be on Walpurgis Night expressed;
What boon I have, shall then be given unto thee.

THE WITCH

Here is a song, which, if you sometimes sing,
You’ll find it of peculiar operation.

MEPHISTOPHELES (_to_ FAUST)

Come, walk at once! A rapid occupation
Must start the needful perspiration,
And through thy frame the liquor’s potence fling.
The noble indolence I’ll teach thee then to treasure,
And soon thou’lt be aware, with keenest thrills of pleasure,
How Cupid stirs and leaps, on light and restless wing.

No, no! The paragon of all, believe me,
Thou soon shalt see, alive and warm.

_(Aside)_

Thou’lt find, this drink thy blood compelling,
Each woman beautiful as Helen!

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Which, then?

She, there? She’s coming from confession,
Of every sin absolved; for I,
Behind her chair, was listening nigh.
So innocent is she, indeed,
That to confess she had no need.
I have no power o’er souls so green.

How now! You’re talking like Jack Rake,
Who every flower for himself would take,
And fancies there are no favors more,
Nor honors, save for him in store;
Yet always doesn’t the thing succeed.

But think, the chances of the case!
I need, at least, a fortnight’s space,
To find an opportune occasion.

You almost like a Frenchman prate;
Yet, pray, don’t take it as annoyance!
Why, all at once, exhaust the joyance?
Your bliss is by no means so great
As if you’d use, to get control,
All sorts of tender rigmarole,
And knead and shape her to your thought,
As in Italian tales ’tis taught.

But now, leave jesting out of sight!
I tell you, once for all, that speed
With this fair girl will not succeed;
By storm she cannot captured be;
We must make use of strategy.

That you may see how much I’d fain
Further and satisfy your pain,
We will no longer lose a minute;
I’ll find her room to-day, and take you in it.

No!
Unto a neighbor she must go,
And meanwhile thou, alone, mayst glow
With every hope of future pleasure,
Breathing her atmosphere in fullest measure.

’Tis too early yet.

Presents at once? That’s good: he’s certain to get at her!
Full many a pleasant place I know,
And treasures, buried long ago:
I must, perforce, look up the matter. _[Exit_.
[Illustration]

Come in, but gently: follow me!

FAUST (_after a moment’s silence_)

Leave me alone, I beg of thee!

MEPHISTOPHELES (_prying about_)

Not every girl keeps things so neat.

FAUST (_looking around_)

O welcome, twilight soft and sweet,
That breathes throughout this hallowed shrine!
Sweet pain of love, bind thou with fetters fleet
The heart that on the dew of hope must pine!
How all around a sense impresses
Of quiet, order, and content!
This poverty what bounty blesses!
What bliss within this narrow den is pent!

(_He throws himself into a leathern arm-chair near the bed_.)

Receive me, thou, that in thine open arms
Departed joy and pain wert wont to gather!
How oft the children, with their ruddy charms,
Hung here, around this throne, where sat the father!
Perchance my love, amid the childish band,
Grateful for gifts the Holy Christmas gave her,
Here meekly kissed the grandsire’s withered hand.
I feel, O maid! thy very soul
Of order and content around me whisper,—
Which leads thee with its motherly control,
The cloth upon thy board bids smoothly thee unroll,
The sand beneath thy feet makes whiter, crisper.
O dearest hand, to thee ’tis given
To change this hut into a lower heaven!
And here!

(_He lifts one of the bed-curtains_.)

What sweetest thrill is in my blood!
Here could I spend whole hours, delaying:
Here Nature shaped, as if in sportive playing,
The angel blossom from the bud.
Here lay the child, with Life’s warm essence
The tender bosom filled and fair,
And here was wrought, through holier, purer presence,
The form diviner beings wear!

And I? What drew me here with power?
How deeply am I moved, this hour!
What seek I? Why so full my heart, and sore?
Miserable Faust! I know thee now no more.

Is there a magic vapor here?
I came, with lust of instant pleasure,
And lie dissolved in dreams of love’s sweet leisure!
Are we the sport of every changeful atmosphere?

And if, this moment, came she in to me,
How would I for the fault atonement render!
How small the giant lout would be,
Prone at her feet, relaxed and tender!

Be quick! I see her there, returning.

Here is a casket, not unmeet,
Which elsewhere I have just been earning.
Here, set it in the press, with haste!
I swear, ’twill turn her head, to spy it:
Some baubles I therein had placed,
That you might win another by it.
True, child is child, and play is play.

Ask you, pray?
Yourself, perhaps, would keep the bubble?
Then I suggest, ’twere fair and just
To spare the lovely day your lust,
And spare to me the further trouble.
You are not miserly, I trust?
I rub my hands, in expectation tender—

(_He places the casket in the press, and locks it again_.)

Now quick, away!
The sweet young maiden to betray,
So that by wish and will you bend her;
And you look as though
To the lecture-hall you were forced to go,—
As if stood before you, gray and loath,
Physics and Metaphysics both!
But away! [_Exeunt_.

MARGARET (_with a lamp_)

It is so close, so sultry, here!

(_She opens the window_)

And yet ’tis not so warm outside.
I feel, I know not why, such fear!—
Would mother came!—where can she bide?
My body’s chill and shuddering,—
I’m but a silly, fearsome thing!

(_She begins to sing while undressing_)

        There was a King in Thule,
        Was faithful till the grave,—
        To whom his mistress, dying,
        A golden goblet gave.

        Naught was to him more precious;
        He drained it at every bout:
        His eyes with tears ran over,
        As oft as he drank thereout.

        When came his time of dying,
        The towns in his land he told,
        Naught else to his heir denying
        Except the goblet of gold.

        He sat at the royal banquet
        With his knights of high degree,
        In the lofty hall of his fathers
        In the Castle by the Sea.

        There stood the old carouser,
        And drank the last life-glow;
        And hurled the hallowed goblet
        Into the tide below.

        He saw it plunging and filling,
        And sinking deep in the sea:
        Then fell his eyelids forever,
        And never more drank he!

(_She opens the press in order to arrange her clothes, and perceives
the casket of jewels_.)

How comes that lovely casket here to me?
I locked the press, most certainly.
’Tis truly wonderful! What can within it be?
Perhaps ’twas brought by some one as a pawn,
And mother gave a loan thereon?
And here there hangs a key to fit:
I have a mind to open it.
What is that? God in Heaven! Whence came
Such things? Never beheld I aught so fair!
Rich ornaments, such as a noble dame
On highest holidays might wear!
How would the pearl-chain suit my hair?
Ah, who may all this splendor own?

(_She adorns herself with the jewelry, and steps before the
mirror_.)

Were but the ear-rings mine, alone!
One has at once another air.
What helps one’s beauty, youthful blood?
One may possess them, well and good;
But none the more do others care.
They praise us half in pity, sure:
To gold still tends,
On gold depends
All, all! Alas, we poor!

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

By all love ever rejected! By hell-fire hot and unsparing!
I wish I knew something worse, that I might use it for
swearing!

I would myself unto the Devil deliver,
If I were not a Devil myself!

Just think, the pocket of a priest should get
The trinkets left for Margaret!
The mother saw them, and, instanter,
A secret dread began to haunt her.
Keen scent has she for tainted air;
She snuffs within her book of prayer,
And smells each article, to see
If sacred or profane it be;
So here she guessed, from every gem,
That not much blessing came with them.
“My child,” she said, “ill-gotten good
Ensnares the soul, consumes the blood.
Before the Mother of God we’ll lay it;
With heavenly manna she’ll repay it!”
But Margaret thought, with sour grimace,
“A gift-horse is not out of place,
And, truly! godless cannot be
The one who brought such things to me.”
A parson came, by the mother bidden:
He saw, at once, where the game was hidden,
And viewed it with a favor stealthy.
He spake: “That is the proper view,—
Who overcometh, winneth too.
The Holy Church has a stomach healthy:
Hath eaten many a land as forfeit,
And never yet complained of surfeit:
The Church alone, beyond all question,
Has for ill-gotten goods the right digestion.”

Then bagged the spangles, chains, and rings,
As if but toadstools were the things,
And thanked no less, and thanked no more
Than if a sack of nuts he bore,—
Promised them fullest heavenly pay,
And deeply edified were they.

Sits unrestful still,
And knows not what she should, or will;
Thinks on the jewels, day and night,
But more on him who gave her such delight.

O yes, the gentleman finds it all child’s-play!

Yes, gracious Sir, in all obedience!

[_Exit_ FAUST.

Such an enamored fool in air would blow
Sun, moon, and all the starry legions,
To give his sweetheart a diverting show.

[_Exit_.

[Illustration]

That I so boldly introduce me,
I beg you, ladies, to excuse me.

(_Steps back reverently, on seeing_ MARGARET.)

For Martha Schwerdtlein I’d inquire!

Ah, not alone the jewelry!
The look, the manner, both betray—
Rejoiced am I that I may stay!

I would I had a more cheerful strain!
Take not unkindly its repeating:
Your husband’s dead, and sends a greeting.

Hear me relate the mournful tale!

Joy follows woe, woe after joy comes flying.

In Padua buried, he is lying
Beside the good Saint Antony,
Within a grave well consecrated,
For cool, eternal rest created.

Yes, one of weight, with many sighs:
Three hundred masses buy, to save him from perdition!
My hands are empty, otherwise.

Madam, it is a grief to me;
Yet, on my word, his cash was put to proper uses.
Besides, his penitence was very sore,
And he lamented his ill fortune all the more.

You well deserve a speedy marriage-offer:
You are so kind, compassionate.

If not a husband, then a beau for you!
It is the greatest heavenly blessing,
To have a dear thing for one’s caressing.

Custom, or not! It happens, though.

I stood beside his bed of dying.
’Twas something better than manure,—
Half-rotten straw: and yet, he died a Christian, sure,
And found that heavier scores to his account were lying.
He cried: “I find my conduct wholly hateful!
To leave my wife, my trade, in manner so ungrateful!
Ah, the remembrance makes me die!
Would of my wrong to her I might be shriven!”


MARTHA (_weeping_)

The dear, good man! Long since was he forgiven.

“Yet she, God knows! was more to blame than I.”

In the last throes his senses wandered,
If I such things but half can judge.
He said: “I had no time for play, for gaping freedom:
First children, and then work for bread to feed ’em,—
For bread, in the widest sense, to drudge,
And could not even eat my share in peace and quiet!”

Not so: the memory of it touched him quite.
Said he: “When I from Malta went away
My prayers for wife and little ones were zealous,
And such a luck from Heaven befell us,
We made a Turkish merchantman our prey,
That to the Soldan bore a mighty treasure.
Then I received, as was most fit,
Since bravery was paid in fullest measure,
My well-apportioned share of it.”

Who knows, now, whither the four winds have blown it?
A fair young damsel took him in her care,
As he in Naples wandered round, unfriended;
And she much love, much faith to him did bear,
So that he felt it till his days were ended.

But see! He’s dead therefrom, at last.
Were I in _your_ place, do not doubt me,
I’d mourn him decently a year,
And for another keep, meanwhile, my eyes about me.

Well, well! That might have done, however,
If he had only been as clever,
And treated _your_ slips with as little heed.
I swear, with this condition, too,
I would, myself, change rings with you.

I’ll cut away, betimes, from here:
She’d take the Devil at his word, I fear.

(_To_ MARGARET)

How fares the heart within your breast?

Yes, my good dame, a pair of witnesses
Always the truth establishes.
I have a friend of high condition,
Who’ll also add his deposition.
I’ll bring him here.

And this young lady will be present, too?
A gallant youth! has travelled far:
Ladies with him delighted are.

Before no king that could be named!



Ah, bravo! Do I find you burning?
Well, Margaret soon will still your yearning:
At Neighbor Martha’s you’ll this evening meet.
A fitter woman ne’er was made
To ply the pimp and gypsy trade!

Yet something is required from us.

We’ve but to make a deposition valid
That now her husband’s limbs, outstretched and pallid,
At Padua rest, in consecrated soil.

_Sancta simplicitas_! no need of such a toil;
Depose, with knowledge or without it, either!

Now, there you are! O holy man!
Is it the first time in your life you’re driven
To bear false witness in a case?
Of God, the world and all that in it has a place,
Of Man, and all that moves the being of his race,
Have you not terms and definitions given
With brazen forehead, daring breast?
And, if you’ll probe the thing profoundly,
Knew you so much—and you’ll confess it roundly!—
As here of Schwerdtlein’s death and place of rest?

Yes, knew I not more deeply thy desire.
For wilt thou not, no lover fairer,
Poor Margaret flatter, and ensnare her,
And all thy soul’s devotion swear her?

’Tis very fine!
Thine endless love, thy faith assuring,
The one almighty force enduring,—
Will that, too, prompt this heart of thine?

And yet I’m right!

_walking up and down_.)

Alas, that trade and duty us so harry!
With what a pang one leaves so many a spot,
And dares not even now and then to tarry!

I dread to see how such a fate advances.

It but depends upon the like of you,
And I should turn to better ways than flirting.

The proverb says: One’s own warm hearth
And a good wife, are gold and jewels worth.

I’ve everywhere, in fact, been entertained politely.

One should allow one’s self to jest with ladies never.

I’m sorry I’m so blind:
But I am sure—that you are very kind.

[_They pass_.

Ay! we must away.

Flown up the alley yonder,
The wilful summer-birds!

And she of him. So runs the world away!

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

A friend!

Tis time to separate.

MARTHA (_coming_)

Yes, Sir, ’tis late.

Have you not led this life quite long enough?
How can a further test delight you?
’Tis very well, that once one tries the stuff,
But something new must then requite you.

Well! I’ll engage to let thee be:
Thou darest not tell me so in earnest.
The loss of thee were truly very slight,—
comrade crazy, rude, repelling:

[Illustration]

One has one’s hands full all the day and night;
If what one does, or leaves undone, is right,
From such a face as thine there is no telling.

Poor Son of Earth, how couldst thou thus alone
Have led thy life, bereft of me?
I, for a time, at least, have worked thy cure;
Thy fancy’s rickets plague thee not at all:
Had I not been, so hadst thou, sure,
Walked thyself off this earthly ball
Why here to caverns, rocky hollows slinking,
Sit’st thou, as ’twere an owl a-blinking?
Why suck’st, from sodden moss and dripping stone,
Toad-like, thy nourishment alone?
A fine way, this, thy time to fill!
The Doctor’s in thy body still.

A blessing drawn from supernatural fountains!
In night and dew to lie upon the mountains;
All Heaven and Earth in rapture penetrating;
Thyself to Godhood haughtily inflating;
To grub with yearning force through Earth’s dark marrow,
Compress the six days’ work within thy bosom narrow,—
To taste, I know not what, in haughty power,
Thine own ecstatic life on all things shower,
Thine earthly self behind thee cast,
And then the lofty instinct, thus—

(_With a gesture_:)

at last,—
daren’t say how—to pluck the final flower!

Yes, thou findest that unpleasant!
Thou hast the moral right to cry me “shame!” at present.
One dares not that before chaste ears declare,
Which chaste hearts, notwithstanding, cannot spare;
And, once for all, I grudge thee not the pleasure
Of lying to thyself in moderate measure.
But such a course thou wilt not long endure;
Already art thou o’er-excited,
And, if it last, wilt soon be plighted
To madness and to horror, sure.
Enough of that! Thy love sits lonely yonder,
By all things saddened and oppressed;
Her thoughts and yearnings seek thee, tenderer, fonder,—
mighty love is in her breast.
First came thy passion’s flood and poured around her
As when from melted snow a streamlet overflows;
Thou hast therewith so filled and drowned her,
That now _thy_ stream all shallow shows.
Methinks, instead of in the forests lording,
The noble Sir should find it good,
The love of this young silly blood
At once to set about rewarding.
Her time is miserably long;
She haunts her window, watching clouds that stray
O’er the old city-wall, and far away.
“Were I a little bird!” so runs her song,
Day long, and half night long.
Now she is lively, mostly sad,
Now, wept beyond her tears;
Then again quiet she appears,—Always
love-mad.

What wouldst thou, then? She thinks that thou art flown;
And half and half thou art, I own.

’Tis very well! _My_ envy oft reposes
On your twin-pair, that feed among the roses.

You rail, and it is fun to me.
The God, who fashioned youth and maid,
Perceived the noblest purpose of His trade,
And also made their opportunity.
Go on! It is a woe profound!
’Tis for your sweetheart’s room you’re bound,
And not for death, indeed.

Again it seethes, again it glows!
Thou fool, go in and comfort her!
When such a head as thine no outlet knows,
It thinks the end must soon occur.
Hail him, who keeps a steadfast mind!
Thou, else, dost well the devil-nature wear:
Naught so insipid in the world I find
As is a devil in despair.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

The monkey! Is she gone?

I’ve heard, most fully, how she drew thee.
The Doctor has been catechised, ’tis plain;
Great good, I hope, the thing will do thee.
The girls have much desire to ascertain
If one is prim and good, as ancient rules compel:
If there he’s led, they think, he’ll follow them as well.

Thou, full of sensual, super-sensual desire,
A girl by the nose is leading thee.

And then, how masterly she reads physiognomy!
When I am present she’s impressed, she knows not how;
She in my mask a hidden sense would read:
She feels that surely I’m a genius now,—
Perhaps the very Devil, indeed!
Well, well,—to-night—?

Yet my delight ’twill also be!

[Illustration]

[Illustration]



I’m like a sentimental tom-cat, rather,
That round the tall fire-ladders sweeps,
And stealthy, then, along the coping creeps:
Quite virtuous, withal, I come,
A little thievish and a little frolicsome.
I feel in every limb the presage
Forerunning the grand Walpurgis-Night:
Day after to-morrow brings its message,
And one keeps watch then with delight.

Shalt soon experience the pleasure,
To lift the kettle with its treasure.
I lately gave therein a squint—
Saw splendid lion-dollars in ’t.

I saw, among the rest, a thing
That seemed to be a chain of pearl.

Thou shouldst not find it so annoying,
Without return to be enjoying.
Now, while the sky leads forth its starry throng,
Thou’lt hear a masterpiece, no work completer:
I’ll sing her, first, a moral song,
The surer, afterwards, to cheat her.

(_Sings to the cither_.)

        What dost thou here
        In daybreak clear,
        Kathrina dear,
        Before thy lover’s door?
        Beware! the blade
        Lets in a maid.
        That out a maid
        Departeth nevermore!

        The coaxing shun
        Of such an one!
        When once ’tis done
        Good-night to thee, poor thing!
        Love’s time is brief:
        Unto no thief
        Be warm and lief,
        But with the wedding-ring!

VALENTINE (_comes forward_)

Whom wilt thou lure? God’s-element!
Rat-catching piper, thou!—perdition!
To the Devil, first, the instrument!
To the Devil, then, the curst musician!

The cither’s smashed! For nothing more ’tis fitting.

Why not? ’tis light.

Of course.

Now is the lubber tame!
But come, away! ’Tis time for us to fly;
For there arises now a murderous cry.
With the police ’twere easy to compound it,
But here the penal court will sift and sound it.

[_Exit with_ FAUST.

MARTHA (_at the window_)

Come out! Come out!

MARGARET (_at the window_)

Quick, bring a light!

MARTHA (_as above_)

They swear and storm, they yell and fight!



DOST thou not wish a broomstick-steed’s assistance?
The sturdiest he-goat I would gladly see:
The way we take, our goal is yet some distance.

I notice no such thing, I vow!
’Tis winter still within my body:
Upon my path I wish for frost and snow.
How sadly rises, incomplete and ruddy,
The moon’s lone disk, with its belated glow,
And lights so dimly, that, as one advances,
At every step one strikes a rock or tree!
Let us, then, use a Jack-o’-lantern’s glances:
I see one yonder, burning merrily.
Ho, there! my friend! I’ll levy thine attendance:
Why waste so vainly thy resplendence?
Be kind enough to light us up the steep!

WILL-O’-THE-WISP

My reverence, I hope, will me enable
To curb my temperament unstable;
For zigzag courses we are wont to keep.

Indeed? he’d like mankind to imitate!
Now, in the Devil’s name, go straight,
Or I’ll blow out his being’s flickering spark!

WILL-O’-THE-WISP

You are the master of the house, I mark,
And I shall try to serve you nicely.
But then, reflect: the mountain’s magic-mad to-day,
And if a will-o’-the-wisp must guide you on the way,
You mustn’t take things too precisely.

FAUST, MEPHISTOPHELES, WILL-O’-THE-WISP

(_in alternating song_)

     We, it seems, have entered newly
     In the sphere of dreams enchanted.
     Do thy bidding, guide us truly,
     That our feet be forwards planted
     In the vast, the desert spaces!
     See them swiftly changing places,
     Trees on trees beside us trooping,
     And the crags above us stooping,
     And the rocky snouts, outgrowing,—
     Hear them snoring, hear them blowing!
     O’er the stones, the grasses, flowing
     Stream and streamlet seek the hollow.
     Hear I noises? songs that follow?
     Hear I tender love-petitions?
     Voices of those heavenly visions?
     Sounds of hope, of love undying!
     And the echoes, like traditions
     Of old days, come faint and hollow.

     Hoo-hoo! Shoo-hoo! Nearer hover
     Jay and screech-owl, and the plover,—
     Are they all awake and crying?
     Is’t the salamander pushes,
     Bloated-bellied, through the bushes?
     And the roots, like serpents twisted,
     Through the sand and boulders toiling,
     Fright us, weirdest links uncoiling
     To entrap us, unresisted:
     Living knots and gnarls uncanny
     Feel with polypus-antennae
     For the wanderer. Mice are flying,
     Thousand-colored, herd-wise hieing
     Through the moss and through the heather!

     And the fire-flies wink and darkle,
     Crowded swarms that soar and sparkle,
     And in wildering escort gather!

     Tell me, if we still are standing,
     Or if further we’re ascending?
     All is turning, whirling, blending,
     Trees and rocks with grinning faces,
     Wandering lights that spin in mazes,
     Still increasing and expanding!

Grasp my skirt with heart undaunted!
Here a middle-peak is planted,
Whence one seeth, with amaze,
Mammon in the mountain blaze.

Has not Sir Mammon grandly lighted
His palace for this festal night?
’Tis lucky thou hast seen the sight;
The boisterous guests approach that were invited.

Under the old ribs of the rock retreating,
Hold fast, lest thou be hurled down the abysses there!
The night with the mist is black;
Hark! how the forests grind and crack!
Frightened, the owlets are scattered:
Hearken! the pillars are shattered.
The evergreen palaces shaking!
Boughs are groaning and breaking,
The tree-trunks terribly thunder,
The roots are twisting asunder!
In frightfully intricate crashing
Each on the other is dashing,
And over the wreck-strewn gorges
The tempest whistles and surges!
Hear’st thou voices higher ringing?
Far away, or nearer singing?
Yes, the mountain’s side along,
Sweeps an infuriate glamouring song!

WITCHES (_in chorus_)

     The witches ride to the Brocken’s top,
     The stubble is yellow, and green the crop.
     There gathers the crowd for carnival:
     Sir Urian sits over all.

     And so they go over stone and stock;
     The witch she——s, and——s the buck.

A VOICE

     Alone, old Baubo’s coming now;
     She rides upon a farrow-sow.

They crowd and push, they roar and clatter!
They whirl and whistle, pull and chatter!
They shine, and spirt, and stink, and burn!
The true witch-element we learn.
Keep close! or we are parted, in our turn,
Where art thou?

FAUST (_in the distance_)

Here!

What! whirled so far astray?
Then house-right I must use, and clear the way.
Make room! Squire Voland comes! Room, gentle rabble,
room!

Here, Doctor, hold to me: in one jump we’ll resume
An easier space, and from the crowd be free:
It’s too much, even for the like of me.
Yonder, with special light, there’s something shining clearer
Within those bushes; I’ve a mind to see.
Come on! we’ll slip a little nearer.

But see, what motley flames among the heather!
There is a lively club together:
In smaller circles one is not alone.

But there enigmas also knotted be.
Leave to the multitude their riot!
Here will we house ourselves in quiet.
It is an old, transmitted trade,
That in the greater world the little worlds are made.
I see stark-nude young witches congregate,
And old ones, veiled and hidden shrewdly:
On my account be kind, nor treat them rudely!
The trouble’s small, the fun is great.
I hear the noise of instruments attuning,—
Vile din! yet one must learn to bear the crooning.
Come, come along! It _must_ be, I declare!
I’ll go ahead and introduce thee there,
Thine obligation newly earning.
That is no little space: what say’st thou, friend?
Look yonder! thou canst scarcely see the end:
A hundred fires along the ranks are burning.
They dance, they chat, they cook, they drink, they court:
Now where, just tell me, is there better sport?

I’m mostly used, ’tis true, to go incognito,
But on a gala-day one may his orders show.
The Garter does not deck my suit,
But honored and at home is here the cloven foot.
Perceiv’st thou yonder snail? It cometh, slow and steady;
So delicately its feelers pry,
That it hath scented me already:
I cannot here disguise me, if I try.
But come! we’ll go from this fire to a newer:
I am the go-between, and thou the wooer.

(_To some, who are sitting around dying embers_:)

Old gentlemen, why at the outskirts? Enter!
I’d praise you if I found you snugly in the centre,
With youth and revel round you like a zone:
You each, at home, are quite enough alone.

(_who all at once appears very old_)

I feel that men are ripe for Judgment-Day,
Now for the last time I’ve the witches’-hill ascended:
Since to the lees _my_ cask is drained away,
The world’s, as well, must soon be ended.

HUCKSTER-WITCH

Ye gentlemen, don’t pass me thus!
Let not the chance neglected be!
Behold my wares attentively:
The stock is rare and various.
And yet, there’s nothing I’ve collected—
No shop, on earth, like this you’ll find!—
Which has not, once, sore hurt inflicted
Upon the world, and on mankind.
No dagger’s here, that set not blood to flowing;
No cup, that hath not once, within a healthy frame
Poured speedy death, in poison glowing:
No gems, that have not brought a maid to shame;
No sword, but severed ties for the unwary,
Or from behind struck down the adversary.

Gossip! the times thou badly comprehendest:
What’s done has happed—what haps, is done!
’Twere better if for novelties thou sendest:
By such alone can we be won.

The whirlpool swirls to get above:
Thou’rt shoved thyself, imagining to shove.

Note her especially,
Tis Lilith.

Adam’s first wife is she.
Beware the lure within her lovely tresses,
The splendid sole adornment of her hair!
When she succeeds therewith a youth to snare,
Not soon again she frees him from her jesses.

No rest to-night for young or old!
They start another dance: come now, let us take hold!

FAUST (_dancing with the young witch_)

     A lovely dream once came to me;
     I then beheld an apple-tree,
     And there two fairest apples shone:
     They lured me so, I climbed thereon.

THE FAIR ONE

     Apples have been desired by you,
     Since first in Paradise they grew;
     And I am moved with joy, to know
     That such within my garden grow.

MEPHISTOPHELES (_dancing with the old one_)

     A dissolute dream once came to me:
     Therein I saw a cloven tree,
     Which had a————————;
     Yet,——as ’twas, I fancied it.

THE OLD ONE

     I offer here my best salute
     Unto the knight with cloven foot!
     Let him a—————prepare,
     If him—————————does not scare.

He now will seat him in the nearest puddle;
The solace this, whereof he’s most assured:
And when upon his rump the leeches hang and fuddle,
He’ll be of spirits and of Spirit cured.

(_To_ FAUST, _who has left the dance_:)

Wherefore forsakest thou the lovely maiden,
That in the dance so sweetly sang?

That’s nothing! One must not so squeamish be;
So the mouse was not gray, enough for thee.
Who’d think of that in love’s selected season?

What?

Let the thing be! All thence have evil drawn:
It is a magic shape, a lifeless eidolon.
Such to encounter is not good:
Their blank, set stare benumbs the human blood,
And one is almost turned to stone.
Medusa’s tale to thee is known.

Tis magic all, thou fool, seduced so easily!
Unto each man his love she seems to be.

Quite right! The mark I also note.
Her head beneath her arm she’ll sometimes carry;
Twas Perseus lopped it, her old adversary.
Thou crav’st the same illusion still!
Come, let us mount this little hill;
The Prater shows no livelier stir,
And, if they’ve not bewitched my sense,
I verily see a theatre.
What’s going on?

When I upon the Blocksberg meet you,
I find it good: for that’s your proper place.


[Illustration]

[Illustration]



She is not the first.

Now we are already again at the end of our wits, where the understanding
of you men runs wild. Why didst thou enter into fellowship with us, if
thou canst not carry it out? Wilt fly, and art not secure against
dizziness? Did we thrust ourselves upon thee, or thou thyself upon us?

Hast thou done?

I cannot loosen the bonds of the Avenger, nor undo his bolts. Rescue
her? Who was it that plunged her into ruin? I, or thou?

(FAUST _looks around wildly_.)

Wilt thou grasp the thunder? Well that it has not been given to you,
miserable mortals! To crush to pieces the innocent respondent—that is
the tyrant-fashion of relieving one’s self in embarrassments.

And the danger to which thou wilt expose thyself? Know that the guilt of
blood, from thy hand, still lies upon the town! Avenging spirits hover
over the spot where the victim fell, and lie in wait for the returning
murderer.

I will convey thee there; and hear, what I can do! Have I all the power
in Heaven and on Earth? I will becloud the jailer’s senses: get
possession of the key, and lead her forth with human hand! I will keep
watch: the magic steeds are ready, I will carry you off. So much is in
my power.

I know not what they are brewing and doing.

A witches’-guild.

On! on!

[Illustration]

She is judged!


VOICE (_from above_)

         She is saved!


MEPHISTOPHELES (_to_ FAUST)

                     Hither to me!

(_He disappears with_ FAUST.)


VOICE (_from within, dying away_)

Henry! Henry!

[illustration]

[Illustration]


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FAUST [PART 1]. TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH IN THE ORIGINAL METRES ***