a knock?
come in!
again my quiet broken?
come in!
come in, then!
this life of earth, whatever my attire, would pain me in its wonted fashion.
too old am i to play with passion; too young, to be without desire.
what from the world have i to gain?
thou shalt abstain—renounce—refrain!
such is the everlasting song that in the ears of all men rings,— that unrelieved, our whole life long, each hour, in passing, hoarsely sings.
in very terror i at morn awake, upon the verge of bitter weeping, to see the day of disappointment break, to no one hope of mine—not one—its promise keeping:— that even each joy’s presentiment with wilful cavil would diminish, with grinning masks of life prevent my mind its fairest work to finish!
then, too, when night descends, how anxiously upon my couch of sleep i lay me: there, also, comes no rest to me, but some wild dream is sent to fray me.
the god that in my breast is owned can deeply stir the inner sources; the god, above my powers enthroned, he cannot change external forces.
so, by the burden of my days oppressed, death is desired, and life a thing unblest!
o fortunate, for whom, when victory glances, the bloody laurels on the brow he bindeth!
whom, after rapid, maddening dances, in clasping maiden-arms he findeth!
o would that i, before that spirit-power, ravished and rapt from life, had sunken!
eavesdropping, ha!
thy pleasure seems to be.
though some familiar tone, retrieving my thoughts from torment, led me on, and sweet, clear echoes came, deceiving a faith bequeathed from childhood’s dawn, yet now i curse whate’er entices and snares the soul with visions vain; with dazzling cheats and dear devices confines it in this cave of pain!
cursed be, at once, the high ambition wherewith the mind itself deludes!
cursed be the glare of apparition that on the finer sense intrudes!
cursed be the lying dream’s impression of name, and fame, and laurelled brow!
cursed, all that flatters as possession, as wife and child, as knave and plow!
cursed mammon be, when he with treasures to restless action spurs our fate!
cursed when, for soft, indulgent leisures, he lays for us the pillows straight!
cursed be the vine’s transcendent nectar,— the highest favor love lets fall!
cursed, also, hope!—cursed faith, the spectre!
and cursed be patience most of all!
and what shall be my counter-service therefor?
no—no!
the devil is an egotist, and is not apt, without a why or wherefore, “for god’s sake,” others to assist.
speak thy conditions plain and clear!
with such a servant danger comes, i fear.
the _there_ my scruples naught increases.
when thou hast dashed this world to pieces, the other, then, its place may fill.
here, on this earth, my pleasures have their sources; yon sun beholds my sorrows in his courses; and when from these my life itself divorces, let happen all that can or will!
i’ll hear no more: ’tis vain to ponder if there we cherish love or hate, or, in the spheres we dream of yonder, a high and low our souls await.
canst thou, poor devil, give me whatsoever?
when was a human soul, in its supreme endeavor, e’er understood by such as thou?
yet, hast thou food which never satiates, now,— the restless, ruddy gold hast thou, that runs, quicksilver-like, one’s fingers through,— a game whose winnings no man ever knew,— a maid that, even from my breast, beckons my neighbor with her wanton glances, and honor’s godlike zest, the meteor that a moment dances,— show me the fruits that, ere they’re gathered, rot, and trees that daily with new leafage clothe them!
when on an idler’s bed i stretch myself in quiet.
there let, at once, my record end!
canst thou with lying flattery rule me, until, self-pleased, myself i see,— canst thou with rich enjoyment fool me, let that day be the last for me!
the bet i offer.
and heartily!
when thus i hail the moment flying: “ah, still delay—thou art so fair!” then bind me in thy bonds undying, my final ruin then declare!
then let the death-bell chime the token.
then art thou from thy service free!
the clock may stop, the hand be broken, then time be finished unto me!
thou hast a perfect right thereto.
my powers i have not rashly estimated: a slave am i, whate’er i do— if thine, or whose?
’tis needless to debate it.
demand’st thou, pedant, too, a document?
hast never known a man, nor proved his word’s intent?
is’t not enough, that what i speak to-day shall stand, with all my future days agreeing?
in all its tides sweeps not the world away, and shall a promise bind my being?
yet this delusion in our hearts we bear: who would himself therefrom deliver?
blest he, whose bosom truth makes pure and fair!
no sacrifice shall he repent of ever.
nathless a parchment, writ and stamped with care, a spectre is, which all to shun endeavor.
the word, alas!
dies even in the pen, and wax and leather keep the lordship then.
what wilt from me, base spirit, say?— brass, marble, parchment, paper, clay?
the terms with graver, quill, or chisel, stated?
i freely leave the choice to thee.
if thou therewith art fully satisfied, so let us by the farce abide.
fear not that i this pact shall seek to sever?
the promise that i make to thee is just the sum of my endeavor.
i have myself inflated all too high; my proper place is thy estate: the mighty spirit deigns me no reply, and nature shuts on me her gate.
the thread of thought at last is broken, and knowledge brings disgust unspoken.
let us the sensual deeps explore, to quench the fervors of glowing passion!
let every marvel take form and fashion through the impervious veil it wore!
plunge we in time’s tumultuous dance, in the rush and roll of circumstance!
then may delight and distress, and worry and success, alternately follow, as best they can: restless activity proves the man!
but thou hast heard, ’tis not of joy we’re talking.
i take the wildering whirl, enjoyment’s keenest pain, enamored hate, exhilarant disdain.
my bosom, of its thirst for knowledge sated, shall not, henceforth, from any pang be wrested, and all of life for all mankind created shall be within mine inmost being tested: the highest, lowest forms my soul shall borrow, shall heap upon itself their bliss and sorrow, and thus, my own sole self to all their selves expanded, i too, at last, shall with them all be stranded!
nay, but i will!
what am i, then, if ’tis denied my part the crown of all humanity to win me, whereto yearns every sense within me?
i feel, indeed, that i have made the treasure of human thought and knowledge mine, in vain; and if i now sit down in restful leisure, no fount of newer strength is in my brain: i am no hair’s-breadth more in height, nor nearer, to the infinite,
then how shall we begin?
to see him now i have no heart.
