’tis i!
thrice must the words be spoken.
thus thou pleasest me.
i hope we’ll suit each other well; for now, thy vapors to dispel, i come, a squire of high degree, in scarlet coat, with golden trimming, a cloak in silken lustre swimming, a tall cock’s-feather in my hat, a long, sharp sword for show or quarrel,— and i advise thee, brief and flat, to don the self-same gay apparel, that, from this den released, and free, life be at last revealed to thee!
and yet is never death a wholly welcome guest.
and yet, by some one, in that nightly hour, a certain liquid was not drunken.
omniscient am i not; yet much is known to me.
these are the small dependants who give me attendance.
hear them, to deeds and passion counsel in shrewd old-fashion!
into the world of strife, out of this lonely life that of senses and sap has betrayed thee, they would persuade thee.
this nursing of the pain forego thee, that, like a vulture, feeds upon thy breast!
the worst society thou find’st will show thee thou art a man among the rest.
but ’tis not meant to thrust thee into the mob thou hatest!
i am not one of the greatest, yet, wilt thou to me entrust thy steps through life, i’ll guide thee,— will willingly walk beside thee,— will serve thee at once and forever with best endeavor, and, if thou art satisfied, will as servant, slave, with thee abide.
the time is long: thou need’st not now insist.
_here_, an unwearied slave, i’ll wear thy tether, and to thine every nod obedient be: when _there_ again we come together, then shalt thou do the same for me.
in this sense, even, canst thou venture.
come, bind thyself by prompt indenture, and thou mine arts with joy shalt see: what no man ever saw, i’ll give to thee.
such a demand alarms me not: such treasures have i, and can show them.
but still the time may reach us, good my friend.
when peace we crave and more luxurious diet.
done!
consider well: my memory good is rated.
then at the doctors’-banquet i, to-day, will as a servant wait behind thee.
but one thing more!
beyond all risk to bind thee, give me a line or two, i pray.
why heat thyself, thus instantly, with eloquence exaggerated?
each leaf for such a pact is good; and to subscribe thy name thou’lt take a drop of blood.
blood is a juice of rarest quality.
for you no bound, no term is set.
whether you everywhere be trying, or snatch a rapid bliss in flying, may it agree with you, what you get!
only fall to, and show no timid balking.
believe me, who for many a thousand year the same tough meat have chewed and tested, that from the cradle to the bier no man the ancient leaven has digested!
trust one of us, this whole supernal is made but for a god’s delight!
_he_ dwells in splendor single and eternal, but _us_ he thrusts in darkness, out of sight, and _you_ he dowers with day and night.
a good reply!
one only fear still needs repeating: the art is long, the time is fleeting.
then let thyself be taught, say i!
go, league thyself with a poet, give the rein to his imagination, then wear the crown, and show it, of the qualities of his creation,— the courage of the lion’s breed, the wild stag’s speed, the italian’s fiery blood, the north’s firm fortitude!
let him find for thee the secret tether that binds the noble and mean together.
and teach thy pulses of youth and pleasure to love by rule, and hate by measure!
i’d like, myself, such a one to see: sir microcosm his name should be.
why, on the whole, thou’rt—what thou art.
set wigs of million curls upon thy head, to raise thee, wear shoes an ell in height,—the truth betrays thee, and thou remainest—what thou art.
good sir, you see the facts precisely as they are seen by each and all.
we must arrange them now, more wisely, before the joys of life shall pall.
why, zounds!
both hands and feet are, truly— and head and virile forces—thine: yet all that i indulge in newly, is’t thence less wholly mine?
if i’ve six stallions in my stall, are not their forces also lent me?
i speed along, completest man of all, as though my legs were four-and-twenty.
take hold, then!
let reflection rest, and plunge into the world with zest!
i say to thee, a speculative wight is like a beast on moorlands lean, that round and round some fiend misleads to evil plight, while all about lie pastures fresh and green.
we’ll try a wider sphere.
what place of martyrdom is here!
is’t life, i ask, is’t even prudence, to bore thyself and bore the students?
let neighbor paunch to that attend!
why plague thyself with threshing straw forever?
the best thou learnest, in the end thou dar’st not tell the youngsters—never!
i hear one’s footsteps, hither steering.
so long the poor boy waits a hearing, he must not unconsoled depart.
thy cap and mantle straightway lend me!
i’ll play the comedy with art.
my wits, be certain, will befriend me.
but fifteen minutes’ time is all i need; for our fine trip, meanwhile, prepare thyself with speed!
[_exit_ faust.
reason and knowledge only thou despise, the highest strength in man that lies!
let but the lying spirit bind thee with magic works and shows that blind thee, and i shall have thee fast and sure!— fate such a bold, untrammelled spirit gave him, as forwards, onwards, ever must endure; whose over-hasty impulse drave him past earthly joys he might secure.
dragged through the wildest life, will i enslave him, through flat and stale indifference; with struggling, chilling, checking, so deprave him that, to his hot, insatiate sense, the dream of drink shall mock, but never lave him: refreshment shall his lips in vain implore— had he not made himself the devil’s, naught could save him, still were he lost forevermore!
your courtesy doth flatter me: you see a man, as others be.
have you, perchance, elsewhere begun?
then you have reached the right place now.
all that depends on habitude.
so from its mother’s breasts a child at first, reluctant, takes its food, but soon to seek them is beguiled.
thus, at the breasts of wisdom clinging, thou’lt find each day a greater rapture bringing.
explain, before you further speak, the special faculty you seek.
here is the genuine path for you; yet strict attention must be given.
use well your time!
it flies so swiftly from us; but time through order may be won, i promise.
so, friend , first, the _collegium logicum_.
there will your mind be drilled and braced, as if in spanish boots ’twere laced, and thus, to graver paces brought, ’twill plod along the path of thought, instead of shooting here and there, a will-o’-the-wisp in murky air.
days will be spent to bid you know, what once you did at a single blow, like eating and drinking, free and strong,— that one, two, three!
thereto belong.
truly the fabric of mental fleece resembles a weaver’s masterpiece, where a thousand threads one treadle throws, where fly the shuttles hither and thither.
unseen the threads are knit together.
and an infinite combination grows.
then, the philosopher steps in and shows, no otherwise it could have been: the first was so, the second so, therefore the third and fourth are so; were not the first and second, then the third and fourth had never been.
the scholars are everywhere believers, but never succeed in being weavers.
he who would study organic existence, first drives out the soul with rigid persistence; then the parts in his hand he may hold and class, but the spiritual link is lost, alas!
_encheiresin natures_, this chemistry names, nor knows how herself she banters and blames!
your mind will shortly be set aright, when you have learned, all things reducing, to classify them for your using.
and after—first and foremost duty—of metaphysics learn the use and beauty!
see that you most profoundly gain what does not suit the human brain!
a splendid word to serve, you’ll find for what goes in—or won’t go in—your mind.
but first, at least this half a year, to order rigidly adhere; five hours a day, you understand, and when the clock strikes, be on hand!
prepare beforehand for your part with paragraphs all got by heart, so you can better watch, and look that naught is said but what is in the book: yet in thy writing as unwearied be, as did the holy ghost dictate to thee!
yet choose thyself a faculty!
nor can i therefore greatly blame you students: i know what science this has come to be.
all rights and laws are still transmitted like an eternal sickness of the race,— from generation unto generation fitted, and shifted round from place to place.
reason becomes a sham, beneficence a worry: thou art a grandchild, therefore woe to thee!
the right born with us, ours in verity, this to consider, there’s, alas!
no hurry.
i should not wish to see you here misguided: for, as regards this science, let me hint ’tis very hard to shun the false direction; there’s so much secret poison lurking in ’t, so like the medicine, it baffles your detection.
hear, therefore, one alone, for that is best, in sooth, and simply take your master’s words for truth.
on _words_ let your attention centre!
then through the safest gate you’ll enter the temple-halls of certainty.
of course!
but only shun too over-sharp a tension, for just where fails the comprehension, a word steps promptly in as deputy.
with words ’tis excellent disputing; systems to words ’tis easy suiting; on words ’tis excellent believing; no word can ever lose a jot from thieving.
i’m tired enough of this dry tone,— must play the devil again, and fully.
to grasp the spirit of medicine is easy: learn of the great and little world your fill, to let it go at last, so please ye, just as god will!
in vain that through the realms of science you may drift; each one learns only—just what learn he can: yet he who grasps the moment’s gift, he is the proper man.
well-made you are, ’tis not to be denied, the rest a bold address will win you; if you but in yourself confide, at once confide all others in you.
to lead the women, learn the special feeling!
their everlasting aches and groans, in thousand tones, have all one source, one mode of healing; and if your acts are half discreet, you’ll always have them at your feet.
a title first must draw and interest them, and show that yours all other arts exceeds; then, as a greeting, you are free to touch and test them, while, thus to do, for years another pleads.
you press and count the pulse’s dances, and then, with burning sidelong glances, you clasp the swelling hips, to see if tightly laced her corsets be.
my worthy friend, gray are all theories, and green alone life’s golden tree.
most willingly, to what extent i may.
assuredly.
follow the ancient text, and the snake thou wast ordered to trample!
with all thy likeness to god, thou’lt yet be a sorry example!
as best it pleases thee.
the little world, and then the great, we’ll see.
with what delight, what profit winning, shalt thou sponge through the term beginning!
my friend, thou soon shalt lose all such misgiving: be thou but self-possessed, thou hast the art of living!
we’ll spread this cloak with proper art, then through the air direct our courses.
but only, on so bold a flight, be sure to have thy luggage light.
a little burning air, which i shall soon prepare us, above the earth will nimbly bear us, and, if we’re light, we’ll travel swift and clear: i gratulate thee on thy new career!
before all else, i bring thee hither where boon companions meet together, to let thee see how smooth life runs away.
here, for the folk, each day’s a holiday: with little wit, and ease to suit them, they whirl in narrow, circling trails, like kittens playing with their tails?
and if no headache persecute them, so long the host may credit give, they merrily and careless live.
not if he had them by the neck, i vow, would e’er these people scent the devil!
is it permitted that we share your leisure?
in place of cheering drink, which one seeks vainly here, your company shall give us pleasure.
we passed, without a call, to-day.
at our last interview, before we parted much of his cousins did he speak, entreating that we should give to each his kindly greeting.
if i am right, we heard the sound of well-trained voices, singing chorus; and truly, song must here rebound superbly from the arches o’er us.
o no!
my wish is great, my power is only so-so.
if you desire, a number.
we’ve just retraced our way from.
spain, the lovely land of wine, and song, and slumber.
there was a king once reigning, who had a big black flea—
there was a king once reigning, who had a big black flea, and loved him past explaining, as his own son were he.
he called his man of stitches; the tailor came straightway: here, measure the lad for breeches.
and measure his coat, i say!
in silk and velvet gleaming he now was wholly drest— had a coat with ribbons streaming, a cross upon his breast.
he had the first of stations, a minister’s star and name; and also all his relations great lords at court became.
and the lords and ladies of honor were plagued, awake and in bed; the queen she got them upon her, the maids were bitten and bled.
and they did not dare to brush them, or scratch them, day or night: we crack them and we crush them, at once, whene’er they bite.
i fain would drink with you, my glass to freedom clinking, if ’twere a better wine that here i see you drinking.
did i not fear the landlord might complain, i’d treat these worthy guests, with pleasure, to some from out our cellar’s treasure.
bring me a gimlet here!
now, give me of your taste some intimation.
the choice is free: make up your minds.
(_boring a hole in the edge of the table, at the place where_ frosch _sits_)  get me a little wax, to make the stoppers, quick!
and you?
(_bores: in the meantime one has made the wax stoppers, and plugged the holes with them_.)
tokay shall flow at once, to fill you!
o no!
with gentlemen of such pretence, that were to venture far, indeed.
speak out, and make your choice with speed!