_by_

_Johann Wolfgang von Goethe_

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY

_Harry Clarke_

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH, IN
THE ORIGINAL METRES, BY

_Bayard Taylor_


_An Illustrated Edition_

THE WORLD PUBLISHING COMPANY

CLEVELAND, OHIO NEW YORK, N.Y.




PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Preface]

It is twenty years since I first determined to attempt the translation
of _Faust_, in the original metres. At that time, although more than a
score of English translations of the First Part, and three or four of
the Second Part, were in existence, the experiment had not yet been
made. The prose version of Hayward seemed to have been accepted as the
standard, in default of anything more satisfactory: the English critics,
generally sustaining the translator in his views concerning the
secondary importance of form in Poetry, practically discouraged any
further attempt; and no one, familiar with rhythmical expression through
the needs of his own nature, had devoted the necessary love and patience
to an adequate reproduction of the great work of Goethe’s life.

Mr. Brooks was the first to undertake the task, and the publication of
his translation of the First Part (in 1856) induced me, for a time, to
give up my own design. No previous English version exhibited such
abnegation of the translator’s own tastes and habits of thought, such
reverent desire to present the original in its purest form. The care and
conscience with which the work had been performed were so apparent, that
I now state with reluctance what then seemed to me to be its only
deficiencies,—a lack of the lyrical fire and fluency of the original in
some passages, and an occasional lowering of the tone through the use of
words which are literal, but not equivalent. The plan of translation
adopted by Mr. Brooks was so entirely my own, that when further
residence in Germany and a more careful study of both parts of _Faust_
had satisfied me that the field was still open,—that the means
furnished by the poetical affinity of the two languages had not yet been
exhausted,—nothing remained for me but to follow him in all essential
particulars. His example confirmed me in the belief that there were few
difficulties in the way of a nearly literal yet thoroughly rhythmical
version of _Faust_, which might not be overcome by loving labor. A
comparison of seventeen English translations, in the arbitrary metres
adopted by the translators, sufficiently showed the danger of allowing
license in this respect: the white light of Goethe’s thought was thereby
passed through the tinted glass of other minds, and assumed the coloring
of each. Moreover, the plea of selecting different metres in the hope of
producing a similar effect is unreasonable, where the identical metres
are possible.

The value of form, in a poetical work, is the first question to be
considered. No poet ever understood this question more thoroughly than
Goethe himself, or expressed a more positive opinion in regard to it.
The alternative modes of translation which he presents (reported by
Riemer, quoted by Mrs. Austin, in her “Characteristics of Goethe,” and
accepted by Mr. Hayward),[A] are quite independent of his views
concerning the value of form, which we find given elsewhere, in the
clearest and most emphatic manner.[B] Poetry is not simply a fashion of
expression: it is the form of expression absolutely required by a
certain class of ideas. Poetry, indeed, may be distinguished from Prose
by the single circumstance, that it is the utterance of whatever in man
cannot be perfectly uttered in any other than a rhythmical form: it is
useless to say that the naked meaning is independent of the form: on the
contrary, the form contributes essentially to the fullness of the
meaning. In Poetry which endures through its own inherent vitality,
there is no forced union of these two elements. They are as intimately
blended, and with the same mysterious beauty, as the sexes in the
ancient Hermaphroditus. To attempt to represent Poetry in Prose, is very
much like attempting to translate music into speech.[C]

[A] “‘There are two maxims of translation,’ says he: ‘the one requires
that the author, of a foreign nation, be brought to us in such a manner
that we may regard him as our own; the other, on the contrary, demands
of us that we transport ourselves over to him, and adopt his situation,
his mode of speaking, and his peculiarities. The advantages of both are
sufficiently known to all instructed persons, from masterly examples.’”
Is it necessary, however, that there should always be this alternative?
Where the languages are kindred, and equally capable of all varieties of
metrical expression, may not both these “maxims” be observed in the same
translation? Goethe, it is true, was of the opinion that _Faust_ ought
to be given, in French, in the manner of Clement Marot; but this was
undoubtedly because he felt the inadequacy of modern French to express
the naive, simple realism of many passages. The same objection does not
apply to English. There are a few archaic expressions in _Faust_, but no
more than are still allowed—nay, frequently encouraged—in the English
of our day.

[B] “You are right,” said Goethe; “there are great and mysterious
agencies included in the various forms of Poetry. If the substance of my
‘Roman Elegies’ were to be expressed in the tone and measure of Byron’s
‘Don Juan,’ it would really have an atrocious effect.”—_Eckermann_.

“The rhythm,” said Goethe, “is an unconscious result of the poetic mood.
If one should stop to consider it mechanically, when about to write a
poem, one would become bewildered and accomplish nothing of real
poetical value.”—_Ibid_.

“_All that is poetic in character should be rythmically treated_! Such
is my conviction; and if even a sort of poetic prose should be gradually
introduced, it would only show that the distinction between prose and
poetry had been completely lost sight of.”—_Goethe to Schiller_, 1797.

Tycho Mommsen, in his excellent essay, _Die Kunst des Deutschen
Uebersetzers aus neueren Sprachen_, goes so far as to say: “The metrical
or rhymed modelling of a poetical work is so essentially the germ of its
being, that, rather than by giving it up, we might hope to construct a
similar work of art before the eyes of our countrymen, by giving up or
changing the substance. The immeasurable result which has followed works
wherein the form has been retained—such as the Homer of Voss, and the
Shakespeare of Tieck and Schlegel—is an incontrovertible evidence of
the vitality of the endeavor.”

[C] “Goethe’s poems exercise a great sway over me, not only by their
meaning, but also by their rhythm. It is a language which stimulates me
to composition.”—_Beethoven_.

The various theories of translation from the Greek and Latin poets have
been admirably stated by Dryden in his Preface to the “Translations from
Ovid’s Epistles,” and I do not wish to continue the endless
discussion,—especially as our literature needs examples, not opinions.
A recent expression, however, carries with it so much authority, that I
feel bound to present some considerations which the accomplished scholar
seems to have overlooked. Mr. Lewes[D] justly says: “The effect of
poetry is a compound of music and suggestion; this music and this
suggestion are intermingled in words, which to alter is to alter the
effect. For words in poetry are not, as in prose, simple representatives
of objects and ideas: they are parts of an organic whole,—they are
tones in the harmony.” He thereupon illustrates the effect of
translation by changing certain well-known English stanzas into others,
equivalent in meaning, but lacking their felicity of words, their grace
and melody. I cannot accept this illustration as valid, because Mr.
Lewes purposely omits the very quality which an honest translator should
exhaust his skill in endeavoring to reproduce. He turns away from the
_one best_ word or phrase in the English lines he quotes, whereas the
translator seeks precisely that one best word or phrase (having _all_
the resources of his language at command), to represent what is said in
_another_ language. More than this, his task is not simply mechanical:
he must feel, and be guided by, a secondary inspiration. Surrendering
himself to the full possession of the spirit which shall speak through
him, he receives, also, a portion of the same creative power. Mr. Lewes
reaches this conclusion: “If, therefore, we reflect what a poem _Faust_
is, and that it contains almost every variety of style and metre, it
will be tolerably evident that no one unacquainted with the original can
form an adequate idea of it from translation,”[E] which is certainly
correct of any translation wherein something of the rhythmical variety
and beauty of the original is not retained. That very much of the
rhythmical character may be retained in English, was long ago shown by
Mr. Carlyle,[F] in the passages which he translated, both literally and
rhythmically, from the _Helena_ (Part Second). In fact, we have so many
instances of the possibility of reciprocally transferring the finest
qualities of English and German poetry, that there is no sufficient
excuse for an unmetrical translation of _Faust_. I refer especially to
such subtile and melodious lyrics as “The Castle by the Sea,” of Uhland,
and the “Silent Land” of Salis, translated by Mr. Longfellow; Goethe’s
“Minstrel” and “Coptic Song,” by Dr. Hedge; Heine’s “Two Grenadiers,” by
Dr. Furness and many of Heine’s songs by Mr. Leland; and also to the
German translations of English lyrics, by Freiligrath and Strodtmann.[G]


[D] Life of Goethe (Book VI.).

[E] Mr. Lewes gives the following advice: “The English reader would
perhaps best succeed who should first read Dr. Anster’s brilliant
paraphrase, and then carefully go through Hayward’s prose translation.”
This is singularly at variance with the view he has just expressed. Dr.
Anster’s version is an almost incredible dilution of the original,
written in _other_ metres; while Hayward’s entirely omits the element of
poetry.

[F] Foreign Review, 1828.

[G] When Freiligrath can thus give us Walter Scott:—

“Kommt, wie der Wind kommt, Wenn Wälder erzittern Kommt, wie die
Brandung Wenn Flotten zersplittern! Schnell heran, schnell herab,
Schneller kommt Al’e!—Häuptling und Bub’ und Knapp, Herr und Vasalle!”

or Strodtmann thus reproduce Tennyson:—

“Es fällt der Strahl auf Burg und Thal, Und schneeige Gipfel, reich an
Sagen; Viel’ Lichter wehn auf blauen Seen, Bergab die Wasserstürze
jagen! Blas, Hüfthorn, blas, in Wiederhall erschallend: Blas,
Horn—antwortet, Echos, hallend, hallend, hallend!”

—it must be a dull ear which would be satisfied with the omission of
rhythm and rhyme.

I have a more serious objection, however, to urge against Mr. Hayward’s
prose translation. Where all the restraints of verse are flung aside, we
should expect, at least, as accurate a reproduction of the sense,
spirit, and tone of the original, as the genius of our language will
permit. So far from having given us such a reproduction, Mr. Hayward not
only occasionally mistakes the exact meaning of the German text,[H] but,
wherever two phrases may be used to express the meaning with equal
fidelity, he very frequently selects that which has the less grace,
strength, or beauty.[I]

[H] On his second page, the line _Mein Lied ertönt der unbekannten
Menge_, “My song sounds to the unknown multitude,” is translated: “My
_sorrow_ voices itself to the strange throng.” Other English
translators, I notice, have followed Mr. Hayward in mistaking _Lied_ for
_Leid_.

I:
 I take but one out of numerous instances, for the sake of
illustration. The close of the Soldier’s Song (Part I. Scene II.) is:—

          “Kühn is das Mühen,
          Herrlich der Lohn!
          Und die Soldaten
          Ziehen davon.”

Literally:

          Bold is the endeavor,
          Splendid the pay!
          And the soldiers
          March away.

This Mr. Hayward translates:—

          Bold the adventure,
          Noble the reward—
          And the soldiers
          Are off.

For there are few things which may not be said, in English, in a twofold
manner,—one poetic, and the other prosaic. In German, equally, a word
which in ordinary use has a bare prosaic character may receive a fairer
and finer quality from its place in verse. The prose translator should
certainly be able to feel the manifestation of this law in both
languages, and should so choose his words as to meet their reciprocal
requirements. A man, however, who is not keenly sensible to the power
and beauty and value of rhythm, is likely to overlook these delicate yet
most necessary distinctions. The author’s thought is stripped of a last
grace in passing through his mind, and frequently presents very much the
same resemblance to the original as an unhewn shaft to the fluted
column. Mr. Hayward unconsciously illustrates his lack of a refined
appreciation of verse, “in giving,” as he says, “_a sort of rhythmical
arrangement_ to the lyrical parts,” his object being “to convey some
notion of the variety of versification which forms one great charm of
the poem.” A literal translation is always possible in the unrhymed
passages; but even here Mr. Hayward’s ear did not dictate to him the
necessity of preserving the original rhythm.

While, therefore, I heartily recognize his lofty appreciation of
_Faust_,—while I honor him for the patient and conscientious labor he
has bestowed upon his translation,—I cannot but feel that he has
himself illustrated the unsoundness of his argument. Nevertheless, the
circumstance that his prose translation of _Faust_ has received so much
acceptance proves those qualities of the original work which cannot be
destroyed by a test so violent. From the cold bare outline thus
produced, the reader unacquainted with the German language would
scarcely guess what glow of color, what richness of changeful life, what
fluent grace and energy of movement have been lost in the process. We
must, of course, gratefully receive such an outline, where a nearer
approach to the form of the original is impossible, but, until the
latter has been demonstrated, we are wrong to remain content with the
cheaper substitute.

It seems to me that in all discussions upon this subject the capacities
of the English language have received but scanty justice. The
intellectual tendencies of our race have always been somewhat
conservative, and its standards of literary taste or belief, once set
up, are not varied without a struggle. The English ear is suspicious of
new metres and unaccustomed forms of expression: there are critical
detectives on the track of every author, and a violation of the accepted
canons is followed by a summons to judgment. Thus the tendency is to
contract rather than to expand the acknowledged excellences of the
language.[J]

[J] I cannot resist the temptation of quoting the following passage from
Jacob Grimm: “No one of all the modern languages has acquired a greater
force and strength than the English, through the derangement and
relinquishment of its ancient laws of sound. The unteachable
(nevertheless _learnable_) profusion of its middle-tones has conferred
upon it an intrinsic power of expression, such as no other human tongue
ever possessed. Its entire, thoroughly intellectual and wonderfully
successful foundation and perfected development issued from a marvelous
union of the two noblest tongues of Europe, the Germanic and the
Romanic. Their mutual relation in the English language is well known,
since the former furnished chiefly the material basis, while the latter
added the intellectual conceptions. The English language, by and through
which the greatest and most eminent poet of modern times—as contrasted
with ancient classical poetry—(of course I can refer only to
Shakespeare) was begotten and nourished, has a just claim to be called a
language of the world; and it appears to be destined, like the English
race, to a higher and broader sway in all quarters of the earth. For in
richness, in compact adjustment of parts, and in pure intelligence, none
of the living languages can be compared with it,—not even our German,
which is divided even as we are divided, and which must cast off many
imperfections before it can boldly enter on its career.”—_Ueber den
Ursprung der Sprache_.

The difficulties in the way of a nearly literal translation of _Faust_
in the original metres have been exaggerated, because certain affinities
between the two languages have not been properly considered. With all
the splendor of versification in the work, it contains but few metres of
which the English tongue is not equally capable. Hood has familiarized
us with dactylic (triple) rhymes, and they are remarkably abundant and
skillful in Mr. Lowell’s “Fable for the Critics”: even the unrhymed
iambic hexameter of the _Helena_ occurs now and then in Milton’s _Samson
Agonistes_. It is true that the metrical foot into which the German
language most naturally falls is the _trochaic_, while in English it is
the _iambic_: it is true that German is rich, involved, and tolerant of
new combinations, while English is simple, direct, and rather shy of
compounds; but precisely these differences are so modified in the German
of _Faust_ that there is a mutual approach of the two languages. In
_Faust_, the iambic measure predominates; the style is compact; the many
licenses which the author allows himself are all directed towards a
shorter mode of construction. On the other hand, English metre compels
the use of inversions, admits many verbal liberties prohibited to prose,
and so inclines towards various flexible features of its sister-tongue
that many lines of _Faust_ may be repeated in English without the
slightest change of meaning, measure, or rhyme. There are words, it is
true, with so delicate a bloom upon them that it can in no wise be
preserved; but even such words will always lose less when they carry
with them their rhythmical atmosphere. The flow of Goethe’s verse is
sometimes so similar to that of the corresponding English metre, that
not only its harmonies and caesural pauses, but even its punctuation,
may be easily retained.

I am satisfied that the difference between a translation of _Faust_ in
prose or metre is chiefly one of labor,—and of that labor which is
successful in proportion as it is joyously performed. My own task has
been cheered by the discovery, that the more closely I reproduced the
language of the original, the more of its rhythmical character was
transferred at the same time. If, now and then, there was an inevitable
alternative of meaning or music, I gave the preference to the former. By
the term “original metres” I do not mean a rigid, unyielding adherence
to every foot, line, and rhyme of the German original, although this has
very nearly been accomplished. Since the greater part of the work is
written in an irregular measure, the lines varying from three to six
feet, and the rhymes arranged according to the author’s will, I do not
consider that an occasional change in the number of feet, or order of
rhyme, is any violation of the metrical plan. The single slight liberty
I have taken with the lyrical passages is in Margaret’s song,—“The King
of Thule,”—in which, by omitting the alternate feminine rhymes, yet
retaining the metre, I was enabled to make the translation strictly
literal. If, in two or three instances, I have left a line unrhymed, I
have balanced the omission by giving rhymes to other lines which stand
unrhymed in the original text. For the same reason, I make no apology
for the imperfect rhymes, which are frequently a translation as well as
a necessity. With all its supreme qualities, _Faust_ is far from being a
technically perfect work.[K]

[K] “At present, everything runs in technical grooves, and the critical
gentlemen begin to wrangle whether in a rhyme an _s_ should correspond
with an _s_ and not with _sz_. If I were young and reckless enough, I
would purposely offend all such technical caprices: I would use
alliteration, assonance, false rhyme, just according to my own will or
convenience—but, at the same time, I would attend to the main thing,
and endeavor to say so many good things that every one would be
attracted to read and remember them.”—_Goethe_, in 1831.

The feminine and dactylic rhymes, which have been for the most part
omitted by all metrical translators except Mr. Brooks, are
indispensable. The characteristic tone of many passages would be nearly
lost, without them. They give spirit and grace to the dialogue, point to
the aphoristic portions (especially in the Second Part), and an
ever-changing music to the lyrical passages. The English language,
though not so rich as the German in such rhymes, is less deficient than
is generally supposed. The difficulty to be overcome is one of
construction rather than of the vocabulary. The present participle can
only be used to a limited extent, on account of its weak termination,
and the want of an accusative form to the noun also restricts the
arrangement of words in English verse. I cannot hope to have been always
successful; but I have at least labored long and patiently, bearing
constantly in mind not only the meaning of the original and the
mechanical structure of the lines, but also that subtile and haunting
music which seems to govern rhythm instead of being governed by it.

B.T.

[Illustration]




AN GOETHE


_Erhabener Geist, im Geisterreich verloren!
Wo immer Deine lichte Wohnung sey,
Zum höh’ren Schaffen bist Du neugeboren,
Und singest dort die voll’re Litanei.
Von jenem Streben das Du auserkoren,
Vom reinsten Aether, drin Du athmest frei,
O neige Dich zu gnädigem Erwiedern
Des letzten Wiederhalls von Deinen Liedern!

I’ve studied now Philosophy
And Jurisprudence, Medicine,—
And even, alas! Theology,—
From end to end, with labor keen;
And here, poor fool! with all my lore
I stand, no wiser than before:
I’m Magister—yea, Doctor—hight,
And straight or cross-wise, wrong or right,
These ten years long, with many woes,
I’ve led my scholars by the nose,—
And see, that nothing can be known!
_That_ knowledge cuts me to the bone.
I’m cleverer, true, than those fops of teachers,
Doctors and Magisters, Scribes and Preachers;
Neither scruples nor doubts come now to smite me,
Nor Hell nor Devil can longer affright me.

For this, all pleasure am I foregoing;
I do not pretend to aught worth knowing,
I do not pretend I could be a teacher
To help or convert a fellow-creature.
Then, too, I’ve neither lands nor gold,
Nor the world’s least pomp or honor hold—
No dog would endure such a curst existence!
Wherefore, from Magic I seek assistance,
That many a secret perchance I reach
Through spirit-power and spirit-speech,
And thus the bitter task forego
Of saying the things I do not know,—
That I may detect the inmost force
Which binds the world, and guides its course;
Its germs, productive powers explore,
And rummage in empty words no more!

O full and splendid Moon, whom I
Have, from this desk, seen climb the sky
So many a midnight,—would thy glow
For the last time beheld my woe!
Ever thine eye, most mournful friend,
O’er books and papers saw me bend;
But would that I, on mountains grand,
Amid thy blessed light could stand,
With spirits through mountain-caverns hover,
Float in thy twilight the meadows over,
And, freed from the fumes of lore that swathe me,
To health in thy dewy fountains bathe me!

Ah, me! this dungeon still I see.
This drear, accursed masonry,
Where even the welcome daylight strains
But duskly through the painted panes.
Hemmed in by many a toppling heap
Of books worm-eaten, gray with dust,
Which to the vaulted ceiling creep,
Against the smoky paper thrust,—
With glasses, boxes, round me stacked,
And instruments together hurled,
Ancestral lumber, stuffed and packed—
Such is my world: and what a world!

And do I ask, wherefore my heart
Falters, oppressed with unknown needs?
Why some inexplicable smart
All movement of my life impedes?
Alas! in living Nature’s stead,
Where God His human creature set,
In smoke and mould the fleshless dead
And bones of beasts surround me yet!

Fly! Up, and seek the broad, free land!
And this one Book of Mystery
From Nostradamus’ very hand,
Is’t not sufficient company?
When I the starry courses know,
And Nature’s wise instruction seek,
With light of power my soul shall glow,
As when to spirits spirits speak.
Tis vain, this empty brooding here,
Though guessed the holy symbols be:
Ye, Spirits, come—ye hover near—
Oh, if you hear me, answer me!

(_He opens the Book, and perceives the sign of the Macrocosm_.)

Ha! what a sudden rapture leaps from this
I view, through all my senses swiftly flowing!
I feel a youthful, holy, vital bliss
In every vein and fibre newly glowing.
Was it a God, who traced this sign,
With calm across my tumult stealing,
My troubled heart to joy unsealing,
With impulse, mystic and divine,
The powers of Nature here, around my path, revealing?
Am I a God?—so clear mine eyes!
In these pure features I behold
Creative Nature to my soul unfold.
What says the sage, now first I recognize:
“The spirit-world no closures fasten;
Thy sense is shut, thy heart is dead:
Disciple, up! untiring, hasten
To bathe thy breast in morning-red!”

(_He contemplates the sign_.)

How each the Whole its substance gives,
Each in the other works and lives!
Like heavenly forces rising and descending,
Their golden urns reciprocally lending,
With wings that winnow blessing
From Heaven through Earth I see them pressing,
Filling the All with harmony unceasing!
How grand a show! but, ah! a show alone.
Thee, boundless Nature, how make thee my own?
Where you, ye beasts? Founts of all Being, shining,
Whereon hang Heaven’s and Earth’s desire,
Whereto our withered hearts aspire,—
Ye flow, ye feed: and am I vainly pining?

(_He turns the leaves impatiently, and perceives the sign of the
Earth-Spirit_.)

How otherwise upon me works this sign!
Thou, Spirit of the Earth, art nearer:
Even now my powers are loftier, clearer;
I glow, as drunk with new-made wine:
New strength and heart to meet the world incite me,
The woe of earth, the bliss of earth, invite me,
And though the shock of storms may smite me,
No crash of shipwreck shall have power to fright me!
Clouds gather over me—
The moon conceals her light—
The lamp’s extinguished!—
Mists rise,—red, angry rays are darting
Around my head!—There falls
A horror from the vaulted roof,
And seizes me!
I feel thy presence, Spirit I invoke!
Reveal thyself!
Ha! in my heart what rending stroke!
With new impulsion
My senses heave in this convulsion!
I feel thee draw my heart, absorb, exhaust me:
Thou must! thou must! and though my life it cost me!

(_He seizes the book, and mysteriously pronounces the sign of
the Spirit. A ruddy flame flashes: the Spirit appears in
the flame_.)

Woe! I endure not thee!

Thee, form of flame, shall I then fear?
Yes, I am Faust: I am thy peer!

Thou, who around the wide world wendest,
Thou busy Spirit, how near I feel to thee!

Yes, when the priest comedian is by nature,
As haply now and then the case may be.

You’ll ne’er attain it, save you know the feeling,
Save from the soul it rises clear,
Serene in primal strength, compelling
The hearts and minds of all who hear.
You sit forever gluing, patching;
You cook the scraps from others’ fare;
And from your heap of ashes hatching
A starveling flame, ye blow it bare!
Take children’s, monkeys’ gaze admiring,
If such your taste, and be content;
But ne’er from heart to heart you’ll speak inspiring,
Save your own heart is eloquent!

Seek thou the honest recompense!
Beware, a tinkling fool to be!
With little art, clear wit and sense
Suggest their own delivery;
And if thou’rt moved to speak in earnest,
What need, that after words thou yearnest?
Yes, your discourses, with their glittering show,
Where ye for men twist shredded thought like paper,
Are unrefreshing as the winds that blow
The rustling leaves through chill autumnal vapor!

Is parchment, then, the holy fount before thee,
A draught wherefrom thy thirst forever slakes?
No true refreshment can restore thee,
Save what from thine own soul spontaneous breaks.

O yes, up to the stars at last!
Listen, my friend: the ages that are past
Are now a book with seven seals protected:
What you the Spirit of the Ages call
Is nothing but the spirit of you all,
Wherein the Ages are reflected.
So, oftentimes, you miserably mar it!
At the first glance who sees it runs away.
An offal-barrel and a lumber-garret,
Or, at the best, a Punch-and-Judy play,
With maxims most pragmatical and hitting,
As in the mouths of puppets are befitting!

Yes, of the kind which men attain!
Who dares the child’s true name in public mention?
The few, who thereof something really learned,
Unwisely frank, with hearts that spurned concealing,
And to the mob laid bare each thought and feeling,
Have evermore been crucified and burned.
I pray you, Friend, ’tis now the dead of night;
Our converse here must be suspended.

Why, here in dust, entice me with your spell,
Ye gentle, powerful sounds of Heaven?
Peal rather there, where tender natures dwell.
Your messages I hear, but faith has not been given;
The dearest child of Faith is Miracle.
I venture not to soar to yonder regions
Whence the glad tidings hither float;
And yet, from childhood up familiar with the note,
To Life it now renews the old allegiance.
Once Heavenly Love sent down a burning kiss
Upon my brow, in Sabbath silence holy;
And, filled with mystic presage, chimed the church-bell slowly,
And prayer dissolved me in a fervent bliss.
A sweet, uncomprehended yearning
Drove forth my feet through woods and meadows free,
And while a thousand tears were burning,
I felt a world arise for me.
These chants, to youth and all its sports appealing,
Proclaimed the Spring’s rejoicing holiday;
And Memory holds me now, with childish feeling,
Back from the last, the solemn way.
Sound on, ye hymns of Heaven, so sweet and mild!
My tears gush forth: the Earth takes back her child!


CHORUS OF DISCIPLES

        Has He, victoriously,
        Burst from the vaulted
        Grave, and all-gloriously
        Now sits exalted?
        Is He, in glow of birth,
        Rapture creative near?
        Ah! to the woe of earth
        Still are we native here.
        We, his aspiring
        Followers, Him we miss;
        Weeping, desiring,
        Master, Thy bliss!

CHORUS OF ANGELS

        Christ is arisen,
        Out of Corruption’s womb:
        Burst ye the prison,
        Break from your gloom!
        Praising and pleading him,
        Lovingly needing him,
        Brotherly feeding him,
        Preaching and speeding him,
        Blessing, succeeding Him,
        Thus is the Master near,—
        Thus is He here!
[Illustration]

Released from ice are brook and river
By the quickening glance of the gracious Spring;
The colors of hope to the valley cling,
And weak old Winter himself must shiver,
Withdrawn to the mountains, a crownless king:
Whence, ever retreating, he sends again
Impotent showers of sleet that darkle
In belts across the green o’ the plain.
But the sun will permit no white to sparkle;
Everywhere form in development moveth;
He will brighten the world with the tints he loveth,
And, lacking blossoms, blue, yellow, and red,
He takes these gaudy people instead.
Turn thee about, and from this height
Back on the town direct thy sight.
Out of the hollow, gloomy gate,
The motley throngs come forth elate:
Each will the joy of the sunshine hoard,
To honor the Day of the Risen Lord!
They feel, themselves, their resurrection:
From the low, dark rooms, scarce habitable;
From the bonds of Work, from Trade’s restriction;
From the pressing weight of roof and gable;
From the narrow, crushing streets and alleys;
From the churches’ solemn and reverend night,
All come forth to the cheerful light.
How lively, see! the multitude sallies,
Scattering through gardens and fields remote,
While over the river, that broadly dallies,
Dances so many a festive boat;
And overladen, nigh to sinking,
The last full wherry takes the stream.
Yonder afar, from the hill-paths blinking,
Their clothes are colors that softly gleam.
I hear the noise of the village, even;
Here is the People’s proper Heaven;
Here high and low contented see!
Here I am Man,—dare man to be!

I take the cup you kindly reach,
With thanks and health to all and each.

(_The People gather in a circle about him_.)


OLD PEASANT

In truth, ’tis well and fitly timed,
That now our day of joy you share,
Who heretofore, in evil days,
Gave us so much of helping care.
Still many a man stands living here,
Saved by your father’s skillful hand,
That snatched him from the fever’s rage
And stayed the plague in all the land.
Then also you, though but a youth,
Went into every house of pain:
Many the corpses carried forth,
But you in health came out again.

No test or trial you evaded:
A Helping God the helper aided.

To Him above bow down, my friends,
Who teaches help, and succor sends!

(_He goes on with_ WAGNER.)

A few more steps ascend, as far as yonder stone!—
Here from our wandering will we rest contented.
Here, lost in thought, I’ve lingered oft alone,
When foolish fasts and prayers my life tormented.
Here, rich in hope and firm in faith,
With tears, wrung hands and sighs, I’ve striven,
The end of that far-spreading death
Entreating from the Lord of Heaven!
Now like contempt the crowd’s applauses seem:
Couldst thou but read, within mine inmost spirit,
How little now I deem,
That sire or son such praises merit!
My father’s was a sombre, brooding brain,
Which through the holy spheres of Nature groped and wandered,
And honestly, in his own fashion, pondered
With labor whimsical, and pain:
Who, in his dusky work-shop bending,
With proved adepts in company,
Made, from his recipes unending,
Opposing substances agree.
There was a Lion red, a wooer daring,
Within the Lily’s tepid bath espoused,
And both, tormented then by flame unsparing,
By turns in either bridal chamber housed.
If then appeared, with colors splendid,
The young Queen in her crystal shell,
This was the medicine—the patients’ woes soon ended,
And none demanded: who got well?
Thus we, our hellish boluses compounding,
Among these vales and hills surrounding,
Worse than the pestilence, have passed.
Thousands were done to death from poison of my giving;
And I must hear, by all the living,
The shameless murderers praised at last!

O happy he, who still renews
The hope, from Error’s deeps to rise forever!
That which one does not know, one needs to use;
And what one knows, one uses never.
But let us not, by such despondence, so
The fortune of this hour embitter!
Mark how, beneath the evening sunlight’s glow,
The green-embosomed houses glitter!
The glow retreats, done is the day of toil;
It yonder hastes, new fields of life exploring;
Ah, that no wing can lift me from the soil,
Upon its track to follow, follow soaring!
Then would I see eternal Evening gild
The silent world beneath me glowing,
On fire each mountain-peak, with peace each valley filled,
The silver brook to golden rivers flowing.
The mountain-chain, with all its gorges deep,
Would then no more impede my godlike motion;
And now before mine eyes expands the ocean
With all its bays, in shining sleep!
Yet, finally, the weary god is sinking;
The new-born impulse fires my mind,—
I hasten on, his beams eternal drinking,
The Day before me and the Night behind,
Above me heaven unfurled, the floor of waves beneath me,—
A glorious dream! though now the glories fade.
Alas! the wings that lift the mind no aid
Of wings to lift the body can bequeath me.
Yet in each soul is born the pleasure
Of yearning onward, upward and away,
When o’er our heads, lost in the vaulted azure,
The lark sends down his flickering lay,—
When over crags and piny highlands
The poising eagle slowly soars,
And over plains and lakes and islands
The crane sails by to other shores.

One impulse art thou conscious of, at best;
O, never seek to know the other!
Two souls, alas! reside within my breast,
And each withdraws from, and repels, its brother.
One with tenacious organs holds in love
And clinging lust the world in its embraces;
The other strongly sweeps, this dust above,
Into the high ancestral spaces.
If there be airy spirits near,
’Twixt Heaven and Earth on potent errands fleeing,
Let them drop down the golden atmosphere,
And bear me forth to new and varied being!
Yea, if a magic mantle once were mine,
To waft me o’er the world at pleasure,
I would not for the costliest stores of treasure—
Not for a monarch’s robe—the gift resign.

Seest thou the black dog coursing there, through corn and
stubble?

Inspect him close: for what tak’st thou the beast?

Seest thou the spiral circles, narrowing faster,
Which he, approaching, round us seems to wind?
A streaming trail of fire, if I see rightly,
Follows his path of mystery.

It seems to me that with enchanted cunning
He snares our feet, some future chain to bind.

The circle narrows: he is near!

Come, follow us! Come here, at least!

No doubt you’re right: no trace of mind, I own,
Is in the beast: I see but drill, alone.

(_Entering, with the poodle_.)

     Behind me, field and meadow sleeping,
     I leave in deep, prophetic night,
     Within whose dread and holy keeping
     The better soul awakes to light.
     The wild desires no longer win us,
     The deeds of passion cease to chain;
     The love of Man revives within us,
     The love of God revives again.

Be still, thou poodle; make not such racket and riot!
Why at the threshold wilt snuffing be?
Behind the stove repose thee in quiet!
My softest cushion I give to thee.
As thou, up yonder, with running and leaping
Amused us hast, on the mountain’s crest,

So now I take thee into my keeping,
A welcome, but also a silent, guest.

     Ah, when, within our narrow chamber
     The lamp with friendly lustre glows,
     Flames in the breast each faded ember,
     And in the heart, itself that knows.
     Then Hope again lends sweet assistance,
     And Reason then resumes her speech:
     One yearns, the rivers of existence,
     The very founts of Life, to reach.

Snarl not, poodle! To the sound that rises,
The sacred tones that my soul embrace,
This bestial noise is out of place.
We are used to see, that Man despises
What he never comprehends,
And the Good and the Beautiful vilipends,
Finding them often hard to measure:
Will the dog, like man, snarl _his_ displeasure?

But ah! I feel, though will thereto be stronger,
Contentment flows from out my breast no longer.
Why must the stream so soon run dry and fail us,
And burning thirst again assail us?
Therein I’ve borne so much probation!
And yet, this want may be supplied us;
We call the Supernatural to guide us;
We pine and thirst for Revelation,
Which nowhere worthier is, more nobly sent,
Than here, in our New Testament.
I feel impelled, its meaning to determine,—
With honest purpose, once for all,
The hallowed Original
To change to my beloved German.

(_He opens a volume, and commences_.)
’Tis written: “In the Beginning was the _Word_.”
Here am I balked: who, now can help afford?
The _Word?_—impossible so high to rate it;
And otherwise must I translate it.
If by the Spirit I am truly taught.
Then thus: “In the Beginning was the _Thought_”
This first line let me weigh completely,
Lest my impatient pen proceed too fleetly.
Is it the _Thought_ which works, creates, indeed?
“In the Beginning was the _Power_,” I read.
Yet, as I write, a warning is suggested,
That I the sense may not have fairly tested.
The Spirit aids me: now I see the light!
“In the Beginning was the _Act_,” I write.

If I must share my chamber with thee,
Poodle, stop that howling, prithee!
Cease to bark and bellow!
Such a noisy, disturbing fellow
I’ll no longer suffer near me.
One of us, dost hear me!
Must leave, I fear me.
No longer guest-right I bestow;
The door is open, art free to go.
But what do I see in the creature?
Is that in the course of nature?
Is’t actual fact? or Fancy’s shows?
How long and broad my poodle grows!
He rises mightily:
A canine form that cannot be!
What a spectre I’ve harbored thus!
He resembles a hippopotamus,
With fiery eyes, teeth terrible to see:
O, now am I sure of thee!
For all of thy half-hellish brood
The Key of Solomon is good.

SPIRITS (_in the corridor_)

     Some one, within, is caught!
     Stay without, follow him not!
     Like the fox in a snare,
     Quakes the old hell-lynx there.
     Take heed—look about!
     Back and forth hover,
     Under and over,
     And he’ll work himself out.
     If your aid avail him,
     Let it not fail him;
     For he, without measure,
     Has wrought for our pleasure.

First, to encounter the beast,
The Words of the Four be addressed:
    Salamander, shine glorious!
    Wave, Undine, as bidden!
    Sylph, be thou hidden!
    Gnome, be laborious!

Who knows not their sense
(These elements),—
Their properties
And power not sees,—
No mastery he inherits
Over the Spirits.

     Vanish in flaming ether,
     Salamander!
     Flow foamingly together,
     Undine!
     Shine in meteor-sheen,
     Sylph!
     Bring help to hearth and shelf.
     Incubus! Incubus!
     Step forward, and finish thus!

Of the Four, no feature
Lurks in the creature.
Quiet he lies, and grins disdain:
Not yet, it seems, have I given him pain.
Now, to undisguise thee,
Hear me exorcise thee!
Art thou, my gay one,
Hell’s fugitive stray-one?
The sign witness now,
Before which they bow,
The cohorts of Hell!

With hair all bristling, it begins to swell.

     Base Being, hearest thou?
     Knowest and fearest thou
     The One, unoriginate,
     Named inexpressibly,
     Through all Heaven impermeate,
     Pierced irredressibly!

Behind the stove still banned,
See it, an elephant, expand!
It fills the space entire,
Mist-like melting, ever faster.
’Tis enough: ascend no higher,—
Lay thyself at the feet of the Master!
Thou seest, not vain the threats I bring thee:
With holy fire I’ll scorch and sting thee!
Wait not to know
The threefold dazzling glow!
Wait not to know
The strongest art within my hands!

This was the poodle’s real core,
A travelling scholar, then? The _casus_ is diverting.

What is thy name?

With all you gentlemen, the name’s a test,
Whereby the nature usually is expressed.
Clearly the latter it implies
In names like Beelzebub, Destroyer, Father of Lies.
Who art thou, then?

What hidden sense in this enigma lies?

Thou nam’st thyself a part, yet show’st complete to me?

I see the plan thou art pursuing:
Thou canst not compass general ruin,
And hast on smaller scale begun.

So, to the actively eternal
Creative force, in cold disdain
You now oppose the fist infernal,
Whose wicked clench is all in vain!
Some other labor seek thou rather,
Queer Son of Chaos, to begin!

Why thou shouldst ask, I don’t perceive.
Though our acquaintance is so recent,
For further visits thou hast leave.
The window’s here, the door is yonder;
A chimney, also, you behold.

The pentagram prohibits thee?
Why, tell me now, thou Son of Hades,
If that prevents, how cam’st thou in to me?
Could such a spirit be so cheated?

Well,—Chance, this time, has fairly hit it!
And thus, thou’rt prisoner to me?
It seems the business has succeeded.

Try, then, the open window-pane!

In Hell itself, then, laws are reckoned?
That’s well! So might a compact be
Made with you gentlemen—and binding,—surely?

One moment more I ask thee to remain,
Some pleasant news, at least, to tell me.

I have not snares around thee cast;
Thyself hast led thyself into the meshes.
Who traps the Devil, hold him fast!
Not soon a second time he’ll catch a prey so precious.

Thereto I willingly agree,
If the diversion pleasant be.

A knock? Come in! Again my quiet broken?

Come in!

Come in, then!

This life of earth, whatever my attire,
Would pain me in its wonted fashion.
Too old am I to play with passion;
Too young, to be without desire.
What from the world have I to gain?
Thou shalt abstain—renounce—refrain!
Such is the everlasting song
That in the ears of all men rings,—
That unrelieved, our whole life long,
Each hour, in passing, hoarsely sings.
In very terror I at morn awake,
Upon the verge of bitter weeping,
To see the day of disappointment break,
To no one hope of mine—not one—its promise keeping:—
That even each joy’s presentiment
With wilful cavil would diminish,
With grinning masks of life prevent
My mind its fairest work to finish!
Then, too, when night descends, how anxiously
Upon my couch of sleep I lay me:
There, also, comes no rest to me,
But some wild dream is sent to fray me.
The God that in my breast is owned
Can deeply stir the inner sources;
The God, above my powers enthroned,
He cannot change external forces.
So, by the burden of my days oppressed,
Death is desired, and Life a thing unblest!

O fortunate, for whom, when victory glances,
The bloody laurels on the brow he bindeth!
Whom, after rapid, maddening dances,
In clasping maiden-arms he findeth!
O would that I, before that spirit-power,
Ravished and rapt from life, had sunken!

Eavesdropping, ha! thy pleasure seems to be.

Though some familiar tone, retrieving
My thoughts from torment, led me on,
And sweet, clear echoes came, deceiving
A faith bequeathed from Childhood’s dawn,
Yet now I curse whate’er entices
And snares the soul with visions vain;
With dazzling cheats and dear devices
Confines it in this cave of pain!
Cursed be, at once, the high ambition
Wherewith the mind itself deludes!
Cursed be the glare of apparition
That on the finer sense intrudes!
Cursed be the lying dream’s impression
Of name, and fame, and laurelled brow!
Cursed, all that flatters as possession,
As wife and child, as knave and plow!
Cursed Mammon be, when he with treasures
To restless action spurs our fate!
Cursed when, for soft, indulgent leisures,
He lays for us the pillows straight!
Cursed be the vine’s transcendent nectar,—
The highest favor Love lets fall!
Cursed, also, Hope!—cursed Faith, the spectre!
And cursed be Patience most of all!

CHORUS OF SPIRITS (_invisible_)

     Woe! woe!
     Thou hast it destroyed,
     The beautiful world,
     With powerful fist:
     In ruin ’tis hurled,
     By the blow of a demigod shattered!
     The scattered
     Fragments into the Void we carry,
     Deploring
     The beauty perished beyond restoring.
     Mightier
     For the children of men,
     Brightlier
     Build it again,
     In thine own bosom build it anew!
     Bid the new career
     Commence,
     With clearer sense,
     And the new songs of cheer
     Be sung thereto!

And what shall be my counter-service therefor?

No—no! The Devil is an egotist,
And is not apt, without a why or wherefore,
“For God’s sake,” others to assist.
Speak thy conditions plain and clear!
With such a servant danger comes, I fear.

The _There_ my scruples naught increases.
When thou hast dashed this world to pieces,
The other, then, its place may fill.
Here, on this earth, my pleasures have their sources;
Yon sun beholds my sorrows in his courses;
And when from these my life itself divorces,
Let happen all that can or will!
I’ll hear no more: ’tis vain to ponder
If there we cherish love or hate,
Or, in the spheres we dream of yonder,
A High and Low our souls await.

Canst thou, poor Devil, give me whatsoever?
When was a human soul, in its supreme endeavor,
E’er understood by such as thou?
Yet, hast thou food which never satiates, now,—
The restless, ruddy gold hast thou,
That runs, quicksilver-like, one’s fingers through,—
A game whose winnings no man ever knew,—
A maid that, even from my breast,
Beckons my neighbor with her wanton glances,
And Honor’s godlike zest,
The meteor that a moment dances,—
Show me the fruits that, ere they’re gathered, rot,
And trees that daily with new leafage clothe them!

When on an idler’s bed I stretch myself in quiet.
There let, at once, my record end!
Canst thou with lying flattery rule me,
Until, self-pleased, myself I see,—
Canst thou with rich enjoyment fool me,
Let that day be the last for me!
The bet I offer.

And heartily!
When thus I hail the Moment flying:
“Ah, still delay—thou art so fair!”
Then bind me in thy bonds undying,
My final ruin then declare!
Then let the death-bell chime the token.
Then art thou from thy service free!
The clock may stop, the hand be broken,
Then Time be finished unto me!

Thou hast a perfect right thereto.
My powers I have not rashly estimated:
A slave am I, whate’er I do—
If thine, or whose? ’tis needless to debate it.

Demand’st thou, Pedant, too, a document?
Hast never known a man, nor proved his word’s intent?
Is’t not enough, that what I speak to-day
Shall stand, with all my future days agreeing?
In all its tides sweeps not the world away,
And shall a promise bind my being?
Yet this delusion in our hearts we bear:
Who would himself therefrom deliver?
Blest he, whose bosom Truth makes pure and fair!
No sacrifice shall he repent of ever.
Nathless a parchment, writ and stamped with care,
A spectre is, which all to shun endeavor.
The word, alas! dies even in the pen,
And wax and leather keep the lordship then.
What wilt from me, Base Spirit, say?—
Brass, marble, parchment, paper, clay?
The terms with graver, quill, or chisel, stated?
I freely leave the choice to thee.

If thou therewith art fully satisfied,
So let us by the farce abide.

Fear not that I this pact shall seek to sever?
The promise that I make to thee
Is just the sum of my endeavor.
I have myself inflated all too high;
My proper place is thy estate:
The Mighty Spirit deigns me no reply,
And Nature shuts on me her gate.
The thread of Thought at last is broken,
And knowledge brings disgust unspoken.
Let us the sensual deeps explore,
To quench the fervors of glowing passion!
Let every marvel take form and fashion
Through the impervious veil it wore!
Plunge we in Time’s tumultuous dance,
In the rush and roll of Circumstance!
Then may delight and distress,
And worry and success,
Alternately follow, as best they can:
Restless activity proves the man!

But thou hast heard, ’tis not of joy we’re talking.
I take the wildering whirl, enjoyment’s keenest pain,
Enamored hate, exhilarant disdain.
My bosom, of its thirst for knowledge sated,
Shall not, henceforth, from any pang be wrested,
And all of life for all mankind created
Shall be within mine inmost being tested:
The highest, lowest forms my soul shall borrow,
Shall heap upon itself their bliss and sorrow,
And thus, my own sole self to all their selves expanded,
I too, at last, shall with them all be stranded!

Nay, but I will!

What am I, then, if ’tis denied my part
The crown of all humanity to win me,
Whereto yearns every sense within me?

I feel, indeed, that I have made the treasure
Of human thought and knowledge mine, in vain;
And if I now sit down in restful leisure,
No fount of newer strength is in my brain:
I am no hair’s-breadth more in height,
Nor nearer, to the Infinite,

Then how shall we begin?

To see him now I have no heart.

Now, whither shall we go?

Yet with the flowing beard I wear,
Both ease and grace will fail me there.
The attempt, indeed, were a futile strife;
I never could learn the ways of life.
I feel so small before others, and thence
Should always find embarrassments.

How shall we leave the house, and start?
Where hast thou servant, coach and horses?

Fair greeting, gentlemen!

To leave them is my inclination.

These crazy signs of witches’ craft repel me!
I shall recover, dost thou tell me,
Through this insane, chaotic play?
From an old hag shall I demand assistance?
And will her foul mess take away
Full thirty years from my existence?
Woe’s me, canst thou naught better find!
Another baffled hope must be lamented:
Has Nature, then, and has a noble mind
Not any potent balsam yet invented?

Yet will I know it.

I am not used to that; I cannot stoop to try it—
To take the spade in hand, and ply it.
The narrow being suits me not at all.

Wherefore the hag, and her alone?
Canst thou thyself not brew the potion?

Absurder than I ever yet did see.

(_who during all this time has been standing before a mirror,
now approaching and now retreating from it_)

What do I see? What heavenly form revealed
Shows through the glass from Magic’s fair dominions!
O lend me, Love, the swiftest of thy pinions,
And bear me to her beauteous field!
Ah, if I leave this spot with fond designing,
If I attempt to venture near,
Dim, as through gathering mist, her charms appear!—
A woman’s form, in beauty shining!
Can woman, then, so lovely be?
And must I find her body, there reclining,
Of all the heavens the bright epitome?
Can Earth with such a thing be mated?

She talks like one who raves in fever.

What nonsense she declaims before us!
My head is nigh to split, I fear:
It seems to me as if I hear
A hundred thousand fools in chorus.

One rapid glance within the mirror give me,
How beautiful that woman-form!

Fair lady, let it not offend you,
That arm and escort I would lend you!

By Heaven, the girl is wondrous fair!
Of all I’ve seen, beyond compare;
So sweetly virtuous and pure,
And yet a little pert, be sure!
The lip so red, the cheek’s clear dawn,
[Illustration:]
I’ll not forget while the world rolls on!
How she cast down her timid eyes,
Deep in my heart imprinted lies:
How short and sharp of speech was she,
Why, ’twas a real ecstasy!

(MEPHISTOPHELES _enters_)

Hear, of that girl I’d have possession!

The one who just went by.

And yet, she’s older than fourteen.

Most Worthy Pedagogue, take heed!
Let not a word of moral law be spoken!
I claim, I tell thee, all my right;
And if that image of delight
Rest not within mine arms to-night,
At midnight is our compact broken.

Had I but seven hours for all,
I should not on the Devil call,
But win her by my own persuasion.

Without that, I have appetite.

Get me something the angel keeps!
Lead me thither where she sleeps!
Get me a kerchief from her breast,—
A garter that her knee has pressed!

And shall I see—possess her?

Can we go thither?

A gift for her I bid thee get!
[_Exit_.



Go! go! I never will retreat.

I know not, should I do it?

What ails thee? What is’t gripes thee, elf?
A face like thine beheld I never.

Thy head is out of order, sadly:
It much becomes thee to be raving madly.

A general practice is the same,
Which Jew and King may also claim.

And Margaret?

The darling’s sorrow gives me pain.
Get thou a set for her again!
The first was not a great display.

Fix and arrange it to my will;
And on her neighbor try thy skill!
Don’t be a Devil stiff as paste,
But get fresh jewels to her taste!

How is it? under way? and soon complete?

Tis well.

One service pays the other thus.

Most wise! And first, of course, we’ll make the journey
  thither?

If you’ve naught better, then, I’ll tear your pretty plan!

Thou art, and thou remain’st, a sophist, liar.

And from my heart.

Hold! hold! It will!—If such my flame,
And for the sense and power intense
I seek, and cannot find, a name;
Then range with all my senses through creation,
Craving the speech of inspiration,
And call this ardor, so supernal,
Endless, eternal and eternal,—
Is that a devilish lying game?

Mark this, I beg of thee!
And spare my lungs henceforth: whoever
Intends to have the right, if but his
  tongue be clever,
Will have it, certainly.
But come: the further talking brings
  disgust,
For thou art right, especially since I
  must.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

A look from thee, a word, more entertains
Than all the lore of wisest brains.

(_He kisses her hand_.)

Trust me, dear heart! what men call sensible
Is oft mere vanity and narrowness.

Ah, that simplicity and innocence ne’er know
Themselves, their holy value, and their spell!
That meekness, lowliness, the highest graces
Which Nature portions out so lovingly—

No doubt you’re much alone?

An angel, if like thee!

The purest bliss was surely then thy dower.

And me, thou angel! didst thou recognize,
As through the garden-gate I came?

And thou forgiv’st my freedom, and the blame
To my impertinence befitting,
As the Cathedral thou wert quitting?

Sweet darling!

Shall that a nosegay be?

How?

What murmurest thou?

MARGARET (_half aloud_)

He loves me—loves me not.

Thou sweet, angelic soul!

MARGARET (_continues_)

Loves me—not—loves me—not—
(_plucking the last leaf, she cries with frank delight_:)

He loves me!

Yes, child! and let this blossom-word
For thee be speech divine! He loves thee!
Ah, know’st thou what it means? He loves thee!

(_He grasps both her hands_.)

O tremble not! but let this look,
Let this warm clasp of hands declare thee
What is unspeakable!
To yield one wholly, and to feel a rapture
In yielding, that must be eternal!
Eternal!—for the end would be despair.
No, no,—no ending! no ending!

MARTHA (_coming forward_)

The night is falling.

A beast!

May I not, then, upon you wait?

Ah, can I not remain?
Farewell!

Would there were other work for thee!
To plague my day auspicious thou returnest.

There is, again, thy proper tone!—
That thou hast bored me, I must thankful be!

What fresh and vital forces, canst thou guess,
Spring from my commerce with the wilderness?
But, if thou hadst the power of guessing,
Thou wouldst be devil enough to grudge my soul the blessing.

Shame on thee!

Serpent! Serpent!

MEPHISTOPHELES _(aside)_

Ha! do I trap thee!

Get thee away with thine offences,
Reprobate! Name not that fairest thing,
Nor the desire for her sweet body bring
Again before my half-distracted senses!

Yet am I near, and love keeps watch and ward;
Though I were ne’er so far, it cannot falter:
I envy even the Body of the Lord
The touching of her lips, before the altar.

Away, thou pimp!

What are, within her arms, the heavenly blisses?
Though I be glowing with her kisses,
Do I not always share her need?
I am the fugitive, all houseless roaming,
The monster without air or rest,
That like a cataract, down rocks and gorges foaming,
Leaps, maddened, into the abyss’s breast!
And side-wards she, with young unwakened senses,
Within her cabin on the Alpine field
Her simple, homely life commences,
Her little world therein concealed.
And I, God’s hate flung o’er me,
Had not enough, to thrust
The stubborn rocks before me
And strike them into dust!
She and her peace I yet must undermine:
Thou, Hell, hast claimed this sacrifice as thine!
Help, Devil! through the coming pangs to push me;
What must be, let it quickly be!
Let fall on me her fate, and also crush me,—
One ruin whelm both her and me!



What I can!

Leave that, my child! Thou know’st my love is tender;
For love, my blood and life would I surrender,
And as for Faith and Church, I grant to each his own.

Must we?

I honor them.

My darling, who shall dare
“I believe in God!” to say?
Ask priest or sage the answer to declare,
And it will seem a mocking play,
A sarcasm on the asker.

Hear me not falsely, sweetest countenance!
Who dare express Him?
And who profess Him,
Saying: I believe in Him!
Who, feeling, seeing,
Deny His being,
Saying: I believe Him not!
The All-enfolding,
The All-upholding,
Folds and upholds he not
Thee, me, Himself?
Arches not there the sky above us?
Lies not beneath us, firm, the earth?
And rise not, on us shining,
Friendly, the everlasting stars?
Look I not, eye to eye, on thee,
And feel’st not, thronging
To head and heart, the force,
Still weaving its eternal secret,
Invisible, visible, round thy life?
Vast as it is, fill with that force thy heart,
And when thou in the feeling wholly blessed art,
Call it, then, what thou wilt,—
Call it Bliss! Heart! Love! God!
I have no name to give it!
Feeling is all in all:
The Name is sound and smoke,
Obscuring Heaven’s clear glow.

The same thing, in all places,
All hearts that beat beneath the heavenly day—
Each in its language—say;
Then why not I, in mine, as well?

Dear love!

How so?

Nay, fear him not, my sweetest one!

There must be such queer birds, however.

Foreboding angel that thou art!

There, now, is thine antipathy!

Ah, shall there never be
A quiet hour, to see us fondly plighted,
With breast to breast, and soul to soul united?

Thou angel, fear it not!
Here is a phial: in her drink
But three drops of it measure,
And deepest sleep will on her senses sink.

If ’twould, my love, would I advise it?

Hast played the spy again?

Thou, monster, wilt nor see nor own
How this pure soul, of faith so lowly,
So loving and ineffable,—
The faith alone
That her salvation is,—with scruples holy
Pines, lest she hold as lost the man she loves so well!

Abortion, thou, of filth and fire!

What’s that to thee?

How from the window of the sacristy
Upward th’eternal lamp sends forth a glimmer,
That, lessening side-wards, fainter grows and dimmer,
Till darkness closes from the sky!
The shadows thus within my bosom gather.

Meanwhile, may not the treasure risen be,
Which there, behind, I glimmering see?

Not even a jewel, not a ring,
To deck therewith my darling girl?

That’s well, indeed! For painful is it
To bring no gift when her I visit.

So long as in my legs I feel the fresh existence.
This knotted staff suffices me.
What need to shorten so the way?
Along this labyrinth of vales to wander,
Then climb the rocky ramparts yonder,
Wherefrom the fountain flings eternal spray,
Is such delight, my steps would fain delay.
The spring-time stirs within the fragrant birches,
And even the fir-tree feels it now:
Should then our limbs escape its gentle searches?

How strangely glimmers through the hollows
A dreary light, like that of dawn!
Its exhalation tracks and follows
The deepest gorges, faint and wan.
Here steam, there rolling vapor sweepeth;
Here burns the glow through film and haze:
Now like a tender thread it creepeth,
Now like a fountain leaps and plays.
Here winds away, and in a hundred
Divided veins the valley braids:
There, in a corner pressed and sundered,
Itself detaches, spreads and fades.
Here gush the sparkles incandescent
Like scattered showers of golden sand;—
But, see! in all their height, at present,
The rocky ramparts blazing stand.

[Illustration: _Under the old ribs of the rock retreating_,]

How raves the tempest through the air!
With what fierce blows upon my neck ’tis beating!

Spirit of Contradiction! On! I’ll follow straight.
’Tis planned most wisely, if I judge aright:
We climb the Brocken’s top in the Walpurgis-Night,
That arbitrarily, here, ourselves we isolate.

Better the summit, I must own:
There fire and whirling smoke I see.
They seek the Evil One in wild confusion:
Many enigmas there might find solution.

Wilt thou, to introduce us to the revel,
Assume the part of wizard or of devil?

Let me not lose myself in all this pother!
This is a fair, as never was another!

But who is that?

Who?

Those two, the old one with the young one sitting,
They’ve danced already more than fitting.

Ah! in the midst of it there sprang
A red mouse from her mouth—sufficient reason.

Then saw I—.

Mephisto, seest thou there,
Alone and far, a girl most pale and fair?
She falters on, her way scarce knowing,
As if with fettered feet that stay her going.
I must confess, it seems to me
As if my kindly Margaret were she.

Forsooth, the eyes they are of one whom, dying,
No hand with loving pressure closed;
That is the breast whereon I once was lying,—
The body sweet, beside which I reposed!

The woe, the rapture, so ensnare me,
That from her gaze I cannot tear me!
And, strange! around her fairest throat
A single scarlet band is gleaming,
No broader than a knife-blade seeming!

In misery! In despair! Long wretchedly astray on the face of the earth,
and now imprisoned! That gracious, ill-starred creature shut in a
dungeon as a criminal, and given up to fearful torments! To this has it
come! to this!—Treacherous, contemptible spirit, and thou hast
concealed it from me!—Stand, then,—stand! Roll the devilish eyes
wrathfully in thy head! Stand and defy me with thine intolerable
presence! Imprisoned! In irretrievable misery! Delivered up to evil
spirits, and to condemning, unfeeling Man! And thou hast lulled me,
meanwhile, with the most insipid dissipations, hast concealed from me
her increasing wretchedness, and suffered her to go helplessly to ruin!
[Illustration: _Roll the devilish eyes wrathfully in thy head_]

Dog! Abominable monster! Transform him, thou Infinite Spirit! transform
the reptile again into his dog-shape? in which it pleased him often at
night to scamper on before me, to roll himself at the feet of the
unsuspecting wanderer, and hang upon his shoulders when he fell!
Transform him again into his favorite likeness, that he may crawl upon
his belly in the dust before me,—that I may trample him, the outlawed,
under foot! Not the first! O woe! woe which no human soul can grasp,
that more than one being should sink into the depths of this
misery,—that the first, in its writhing death-agony under the eyes of
the Eternal Forgiver, did not expiate the guilt of all others! The
misery of this single one pierces to the very marrow of my life; and
thou art calmly grinning at the fate of thousands!

Gnash not thus thy devouring teeth at me? It fills me with horrible
disgust. Mighty, glorious Spirit, who hast vouchsafed to me Thine
apparition, who knowest my heart and my soul, why fetter me to the
felon-comrade, who feeds on mischief and gluts himself with ruin?

Rescue her, or woe to thee! The fearfullest curse be upon thee for
thousands of ages!

Take me thither! She shall be free!

That, too, from thee? Murder and death of a world upon thee, monster!
Take me thither, I say, and liberate her!

Up and away!

[Illustration]

What weave they there round the raven-stone?

Soaring up, sweeping down, bowing and bending!

They scatter, devote and doom!

(_with a bunch of keys and a lamp, before an iron door_)

A shudder, long unfelt, comes o’er me;
Mankind’s collected woe o’erwhelms me, here.
She dwells within the dark, damp walls before me,
And all her crime was a delusion dear!
What! I delay to free her?
I dread, once again to see her?
On! my shrinking but lingers Death more near.

(_He grasps the lock: the sound of singing is heard inside_.)

     _My mother, the harlot,
     Who put me to death;
     My father, the varlet,
     Who eaten me hath!
     Little sister, so good,
     Laid my bones in the wood,
     In the damp moss and clay:_
     _Then was I a beautiful bird o’ the wood;
     Fly away! Fly away_!

FAUST _(unlocking)_

She does not dream her lover listens near;
That he the rattling chain, the rustling straw, can hear.

_(He enters_.)

MARGARET (_hiding herself on the pallet_)
Woe! woe! They come. O death of bitterness!

FAUST (_whispering_)
Hush! hush! The hour is come that frees thee.

MARGARET (_throwing herself before him_)
Art thou a man, then pity my distress!

Thy cries will wake the guards, and they will seize thee!
(_He takes hold of the fetters to unlock them_.)

MARGARET (_on her knees_)

Who, headsman! unto thee such power
Over me could give?
Thou’rt come for me at midnight-hour:
Have mercy on me, let me live!
Is’t not soon enough when morning chime has run?

(_She rises_.)

And I am yet so young, so young!
And now Death comes, and ruin!
I, too, was fair, and that was my undoing.
My love was near, but now he’s far;
Torn lies the wreath, scattered the blossoms are.
Seize me not thus so violently!
Spare me! What have I done to thee?
Let me not vainly entreat thee!
I never chanced, in all my days, to meet thee!

Shall I outlive this misery?

’Tis I!

Away, now!
If longer here thou stayest,
We shall be made to dearly rue it.

Come, follow me! My darling, be more bold:
I’ll clasp thee, soon, with warmth a thousand-fold;
But follow now! ’Tis all I beg of thee.

MARGARET (_turning to him_)

And is it thou? Thou, surely, certainly?

’Tis I! Come on!

Come! come! The night already vanisheth.

O, let the past be past!
Thy words will slay me!

If thou feel’st it is I, then come with me!

To freedom.

Thou canst! Just will it! Open stands the door.

I’ll stay with thee.

Recall thy wandering will!
One step, and thou art free at last!

Here words and prayers are nothing worth;
I’ll venture, then, to bear thee forth.

The day dawns: Dearest! Dearest!

O had I ne’er been born!

MEPHISTOPHELES (_appears outside_)

Off! or you’re lost ere morn.
Useless talking, delaying and praying!
My horses are neighing:
The morning twilight is near.

Thou shalt live.

